MID 402201, North Korea v. US
Sep 6 to Oct 6, 1993 – Nov 2, 1994



Interview With Timothy Russert and Tom Brokaw on "Meet the Press"
November 7, 1993

The President. North Korea cannotbeallowed to develop a nuclear bomb. We have to be very firm about it. This is a difficult moment in our relationship with them and, I think, a difficult moment for them. They're one of the most, perhaps the most isolated country in the world, with enormous economic problems, trying to decide what direction to take now, sometimes seeming to reach out to South Korea, sometimes seeming to draw back. 
I spend a lot of time on this issue. It's a very, very major issue. We have got to stop the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and particularly North Korea needs to stay in the control regime. They don't need to withdraw. Now, there is a lot of disagreement about what we should do now. I just want to assure you and the American people that we are doing everything we possibly can to make the best decisions, to be firm in this. We are consulting with our allies in South Korea and Japan. They are most immediately affected by what we do and how we do it. And we have worked with the Chinese who, despite our other differences, have helped us to try to work through this. 
The President. I don't think I should discuss any specific options today. All I can tell you is that I tried to issue the sternest, clearest possible statement about this when I was in Korea. Nothing has changed since then. I think you asked me a question about it one time also, Tom. This is a very grave issue for the United States. 
The President. Absolutely. We have our soldiers there. They know that. We still have people stationed near the Bridge of No Return. I was up there on the bridge; I was in those bunkers with our young Americans. They know that any attack on South Korea is an attack on the United States.

Remarks on Governors' Endorsements of NAFTA and an Exchange With Reporters
November 16, 1993

The President. I'm not at liberty even to comment on that now. The negotiations are going on, and I don't think I should comment. I'll have more to say about that, I hope, in the next few days.



Remarks to the Seattle APEC Host Committee
November 19, 1993

We could even see a Korean Peninsula that no longer braces for war but that lives in peace and security because its people, both north and south, have decided on the terms of reunification. We could see a region where weapons of mass destruction are not among the exports and where security and stability are assured by mutual strength, respect, and cooperation, a region in which diverse cultures and economies show their common wisdom and humanity by joining to preserve the glory of the Pacific environment for future generations


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan in Seattle
November 19, 1993

The President. What I meant by that is I think that we all have to work together, as we are now, on the issues of concern to us. As you know, the United States is very concerned that North Korea not become a nuclear power and adhere to the missile technology control regime, I mean, the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons issue. And we have worked very hard to try to get our inspectors in there through IAEA. And the Japanese and the Chinese, I might add, have been very cooperative with us and tried very hard to give us good advice, and we consulted together. That's the kind of thing I think we have to do more of


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With President Jiang Zemin of China in Seattle
November 19, 1993

In our meeting I reaffirmed the United States support for the three joint communiques as the bedrock of our one China policy. We agreed on the need to preserve the peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula and to work together to ensure that North Korea resolves the world's concerns over its nuclear problems

The President. Well, first of all, that's precisely what we want to avoid. We want to avoid the situation where the IAEA can no longer certify that North Korea is nonnuclear. So you're in the worst of both worlds; you don't know whether it is, but you can't say that it isn't. That is what we're trying to avoid. 
Secondly, you should understand that perhaps next only to South Korea, both China and Japan are deeply interested in the same objective. They do not wish to have a nuclear North Korea. And so they support the policy of trying to prevent that from happening. All three of those countries have a great deal of sensitivity about what is most likely to bring about that result. They are worried about whether sanctions would backfire. And we have discussed with them some other options, perhaps taking a more comprehensive approach to all the differences between us in an attempt to demonstrate again to North Korea that they have nothing to be afraid of from an honest dialog with the South and from allowing the inspectors to come back in. 
So we are looking at what some other options are now. But this is a very important issue, and the United States, I think, clearly has the responsibility to lead on this issue. And we are doing our best to do it. We are on top of it. And I know there are those who think we should have taken a different course, who think, well, maybe we just haven't been involved in this. But I would remind you that South Korea, Japan, and China are intimately interested and personally affected by those developments. And we have consulted extensively with all three of them all along the way, and we are pursuing the policy we think has the best chance of success.



Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With APEC Leaders in Seattle
November 20, 1993

The President. We didn't discuss it today, but it was discussed yesterday. And I look forward to meeting with President Kim in Washington. He's going back to Washington, and we'll be meeting there and talking about it. It is a source of concern to us, but one that we believe we can find solutions to. And we're going to be taking some initiatives in that area in the nottoo-distant future.


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines
November 22, 1993

The President. I have nothing to say other than what I said at the APEC meeting about that. We're working hard on that issue, and I've consulted with the South Koreans and with the Japanese and with the Chinese at the APEC meeting extensively about that issue


The President's News Conference With President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines
November 22, 1993

As you know, President Kim of South Korea will be here tomorrow. And our administration has been working on a new approach to deal with this issue. I want to discuss it with him tomorrow, and then I expect to have an announcement on it. 
I think it's fair to say that Japan does not wish to become a nuclear power and that in my talks with Prime Minister Hosokawa and with President Jiang of China, it was obvious to me that no one in the region wants North Korea to become a nuclear power. So we're going to do everything we can in close consultation with the countries most affected in the region to try to find a resolution to this. I also discussed this with President Ramos today because the Philippines has important membership on the IAEA, and he gave me his thoughts on it. We are working on it. I want to consult with President Kim tomorrow, and then I expect to have another announcement.



The President's News Conference With President Kim Yong-sam of South Korea
November 23, 1993

The most important piece of our discussions centered on North Korea. We are both concerned by North Korea's concentration of forces near the Demilitarized Zone and by its refusal to grant international inspectors full access to its nuclear sites. 
In recent weeks, my administration has been working with the Congress, South Korea, Japan, our partners in the United Nations Security Council and others to address North Korea's nuclear program in a firm manner. Today I reaffirmed to President Kim America's unyielding commitment to South Korea's security. My administration has made it clear to North Korea that it now faces a simple choice. If it abandons its nuclear option and honors its international nonproliferation commitments, the door will be open on a wide range of issues not only with the United States but with the rest of the world. If it does not, it risks facing the increased opposition of the entire international community. 
Our goals in this matter are clear: a nonnuclear peninsula and a strong international nonproliferation regime. To these ends, we are prepared to discuss with North Korea a thorough, broad approach to the issues that divide us, and once and for all to resolve the nuclear issue. But we cannot do that in the absence of a dialog between North and South Korea and while there is still growing doubt about the continuity of IAEA safeguards. 
North Korea's nuclear program and its continuing military threat pose serious challenges to both South Korea and America. Our two nations have worked together to overcome these challenges before. Our friendship was forged in the heat of war as our forces fought shoulder to shoulder to turn back aggression. Our friendship has continued over four decades since that war ended as the people of Korea have transformed their country into an economic and democratic model for the entire region.
President Clinton. We did not agree to relax anything. What we agreed was that the two of us, based on our own security needs, would reexamine what our policies are if the North Koreans are willing to allow IAEA inspectors and resume the serious dialog with the Republic of Korea; that we needed to make it clear that all of our security decisions would be made in light of that context. And I don't consider that weakening our position or changing it or rewarding aggression. In fact, what we want to do is to diminish the military tensions in the area. That has to begin by a willingness on the part of North Korea to allow the inspections and to resume the dialog. 
President Clinton. Well, we're asking them to make two concessions that they're already committed to do. And we're committing then that the two of us will reexamine our security approach in light of that. But we're not divided at all. We reached agreement. We, indeed, have reconciled the precise language that would be used by each of us in this statement today. So there is no division between the two countries on our position. 
President Clinton. That is something that would have to be decided by both of us at a later date, depending on what would be done or not done by North Korea. We've made no decision on that and no commitment on that, and we couldn't now. 
President Clinton. With regard to the two questions you asked me, let me say that neither President Kim nor I are eager to go to the United Nations and ask for sanctions against North Korea. We had discussed with the leaders of Japan and China at the recent APEC meeting the fact that that is not a particularly attractive option. We have offered as clearly as we could to North Korea the opportunity to reassess our relationships, at least in terms of our security requirements, if they will simply follow their own commitments and honor them on the IAEA inspections and on resuming the dialog with the Republic of Korea. 
Now, as to your second question, I can only reiterate what I said when I was in Korea. I know of no one who seriously believes that the United States and the Republic of Korea would be defeated in a war of aggression by North Korea if they were to attack. And I made it as clear as I could that if they were to do that, they would pay a price so great that the nation would probably not survive as it is known today. 
President Clinton. First of all, there is some time sensitivity on this, based on what we hear from the IAEA inspectors. And that's the reason that we're coming forward now and trying to make another good faith effort to reach out and reason with North Korea. 
President Clinton. Well, any concessions—first of all, concessions is the wrong word. Any gesture we make, any move we make based on our—must be based on our appreciation of what the security situation is. And they are the ones, after all, who are out of line with the international law and their own commitments. So, we can't make any decisions about what we would do until we see what they do. That's all we're saying today. But we have clearly broadened the dialog on this, or given them, rather, the more specific thing would—we've given them a chance to broaden the dialog. We'll just have to see if they take us up on it. 

Remarks at the State Dinner for President Kim Yong-sam of South Korea
November 23, 1993

For 43 years, Mr. President, America and Korea have stood shoulder to shoulder to preserve security on the peninsula. Today, new challenges such as North Korea's nuclear program continue to demand our vigilance and our determined effort. But they also demand that we demonstrate vision. You and I share a vision, Mr. President, a vision of a Korea at peace and one day reunited on terms acceptable to the Korean people.


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Carl Bildt of Sweden
December 1, 1993

The President. I don't know what to make of it yet. I wouldn't overreact to it. We're just going to have to see. The one thing I've learned here over the last year in dealing with North Korea is that it's important not to overreact, either positively or negatively, to something that they say which may not mean the same thing to them that it does to us the first time we hear it. And I mean that on the upside as well as the downside. We're just going to have to see and kind of work through this and see what happens. 
The President. I think it is. I hope it is, and I think it is. 
The President. I've tried to review his remarks, and I'm not sure I would characterize it quite in that way. I think, like all of us, he's very concerned about it, and he's studied it very closely. And all I can tell you is we have a strategy; we're going to pursue it, and we're going to keep going


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain
December 6, 1993

The President. Well, what the IAEA has said is that they didn't think it was entirely adequate. But we have to go back and respond to them and we—at least they came forward, they reacted to our initiative. And we're consulting with the South Koreans now. We'll have a conversation with them and see what happens. 
The President. Well, obviously they didn't say, "We liked everything the United States said," and yes. So we were hoping that we could move more quickly, but I'm not entirely discouraged. We're talking to the South Koreans, and then we'll go back to the—

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain
December 6, 1993

The President. Well, as I said earlier, obviously we're not entirely satisfied with the response of the North Koreans to the proposal we put forward, but we're going to meet about it later today, and then we're going to consult with the South Koreans and our other allies in the area and formulate our next move. I think it's important for me to have the opportunity to meet and discuss this, and I will be doing so this afternoon. And then it's equally important for us to get back to the South Koreans and others, so I'll probably have more to say about it in the next day or two. But I think that, in fairness, I need to wait until I talk to my principal advisers and also talk to our allies. 
The President. Well, what I liked most about it was there was some indication on their part that they understood that we needed to both start inspections and the dialog again between the South and the North; that was clear. And so it's like all these things in international diplomacy, the devil's in the details. But I'm hopeful that we can work something out, and I don't want to say more until I have a chance to meet with my advisers and also to talk to our allies
The President. The near-term urgency is basically a function of what the IAEA has said. The longer they go on without adequate inspections, the more difficult it is for them to be able to certify the actual condition of the North Korean nuclear program and that's what the issue is. That's why we're trying to work it through as quickly as we can so we won't finally and completely break the chain that enables the IAEA to make certain representations to the rest of the world about where they are on that





Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and Prime Minister Robert Malval of Haiti and an Exchange With Reporters
December 6, 1993

The President. We worked through the problem, and at the end of the meeting I authorized our folks to go back to the South Koreans and our allies, and I expect to have a talk with President Kim sometime in the next 24 hours. We'll talk a little more about it then. I want to talk to them before I say more


Remarks in a Telephone Conversation With the Space Shuttle Endeavour Astronauts and an Exchange With Reporters
December 10, 1993

The President. Well, let me just say we have some hope for the continuing discussions. When negotiations are going on, I'm always reluctant to characterize them one way or the other, whether it's GATT or with North Korea. I just don't want to do that. But if you've asked me, have I given up on the discussions, the answer to that is no. We're aggressively pursuing them. 

Interview With Larry King
January 20, 1994
The President. Well, first let me say, thank you to the gentleman from Hawaii for the condolences for my mother, and mine to the mother of the Governor of Hawaii who passed away today. A wonderful woman. 
The Korean—let me just tell you, if you follow the press you know that the intelligence reports are divided on the question of how far the North Koreans have gone in developing a nuclear weapon. But everybody knows they are trying to. Even if they develop one, then there's the question of their delivery capacity, which is in doubt. 
I wouldn't say Hawaii is in serious danger right now. What I would say is that we need to keep working very hard and to be very firm about not wanting Korea to join the family of nuclear states. You know, I've been out here working to reduce the number of countries with nuclear weapons, with Ukraine and Kazakhstan and Belarus committing to get rid of their weapons. We are now involved in intense negotiations, and the only thing I can tell you is we're working as hard as we can to be as firm as we can and then to be as also as firm as we can about the security of our people and the South Koreans in the event all does not go well. But we are working very hard, and I certainly have not given up yet on getting the North Koreans to go back into the NPT system and agreeing to let the International Atomic Energy inspectors in there to look at what they're doing. They ought to do it. 
The country is so isolated. They're isolated economically. Even China used to be a big ally of theirs. China now does 8 or 10 times as much trade with South Korea as with North Korea. And I think they believe that somehow this gives them some handle on national prestige. I think their best way to be esteemed in the rest of the world is to be a good citizen and give the rest of us a chance to relate to them.



The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa of Japan
February 11, 1994

Our shared interests are nowhere clearer than on the Korean Peninsula. North Korea's nuclear program poses a serious threat to regional stability and to international nonproliferation efforts. We agreed to continue our close cooperation in pursuing a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula.

The President. Well, we discussed that today, and obviously we discussed what our options were, including sanctions. We discussed also the fact that in this particular policy, Japan, China, South Korea, and the United States all want a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. All very much want North Korea to comply with our IAEA standards and therefore permitting it to resume some contact with the South. That has been the position of all four of our countries, and what we're doing now is consulting all of us among one another to try to see what our options are. But obviously, the sanctions option is one option


Exchange With Reporters in Miami, Florida
March 20, 1994

The President. As you know, the Board of Governors of the IAEA is meeting tomorrow. 
Our goals remain the same. We haven't changed our policy. We did do quite a bit of work yesterday, spent a good deal of time discussing this. But I really don't have anything else to say at this time. I'm talking to our allies. And we're working through this and what our options are. 
The President. Well, of course, they can. They can—that really is a decision that's up to the North Koreans as much as anything else. But there are—we also have some hope that they will go forward. They did let the inspectors in; then they didn't; they did. There seems to be a difference of opinion within their country about how to proceed. So to some extent the ball is still clearly in their court. But we are proceeding to consider all of our options and to talk with our allies about it. 
The President. I didn't say I hope. He didn't ask me if I hoped they would. 
The President. Well, of course, there is. There appear to be people within North Korea that want to proceed to normalize the relations of their country with the international community and people who don't. And we'll just have to see what they do now, where we go from here. But our objectives remain what they have always been. We have been entirely reasonable and forthcoming. And we have also worked very closely with not only our strong allies in South Korea but with the Japanese, the Chinese, and others who share many or if not all of our objectives. So we're going to keep going forward, see what happens in the next few days. But the next step is to see what happens at the Board of Governors meeting. 
The President. Well, I have done everything I could to avoid ratcheting up the tensions while being firm in the objectives of our policy and what I think are in the interests of not just the United States but the people of that part of the world and Asia. So we're just working ahead. 
I'm not trying to ratchet up the tensions, I'm just trying to work through this in a very deliberate but very firm and disciplined way, and that's what we'll continue to do. 


Exchange With Reporters in Deerfield Beach, Florida
March 21, 1994

The President. Let me just say, about North Korea, the IAEA has made their judgment; now there will be consultations at the U.N. 
I think you know—I think President Kim has confirmed that I sent him a letter at the end of last week. And we have agreed that it is in our national interest and the interest of the security of the people of South Korea and the security of our armed forces there to proceed with the Patriot deployment, so we will do that. 
As to the next issues, I think we have to just wait and see what will happen. I can't say more today. We're going to have to work on this on a day-to-day basis. I will say again, I want to emphasize this decision on the Patriots is purely defensive in nature. But it is appropriate—General Luck has said he thinks it's necessary as the continuing modernization of our forces proceeds. What happens now is still in the court of the North Koreans, and we must hope that they will do theright thing.



The President's News Conference
March 24, 1994
Around the world, America's efforts have helped to bring much needed calm to Sarajevo and led to an important political accord between the Bosnian Muslims and Croats. Our callfor restraint has helped to start talks again the Middle East. We will continue our efforts to stop North Korea's nuclear program and to seek progress on human rights in China, working to build a more positive relationship with that very important nation. This Friday, a week ahead of schedule, our troops will return home from Somalia. Because of their courageous efforts, Somalia can now build its own future, a step it made in theright direction today with the accord between the leaders of the two largest factions in that country

The President. That's the quickest anybody ever asked me three questions at once. [Laughter] First of all, the situation in Korea is serious, and we have responded in a serious way. The North Koreans themselves have said they arecommitted to a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. We want that. We want a good, normal relationship with them. They have terminated the IAEA inspections. We are examining what we can do. We are talking to our South Korean partners as well as to the Chinese, the Japanese, the Russians, and others. 
We still hope that this can be resolved, and we believe it can be. But the choice is really up to North Korea. Will they be isolated from the world community, or will they be a full partner? They could have a very bright future indeed. They have many contributions to make, indeed, to a united Korea. And we hope that it will work out. But I did decide to deploy the Patriots on the recommendation of General Luck as a purely defensive measure in the wake of the difficulties we've had, and we'll make further decisions as we go along.



Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters in San Diego, California
March 30, 1994

Now, I just completed—literally, just a few minutes ago, 10, 15 minutes ago—a conversation with President Kim of South Korea about the whole Korean situation and about his recent trip to Japan and to China. He and I reaffirmed our common intention to continue to work together for a peaceful but firm resolution of this problem with North Korea. 
The North Koreans themselves have committed to a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula. They have committed to the IAEA inspection process. All we want is for them to keep that commitment as well as their commitment to resume their dialog with South Korea. And we're going to work very closely together in the U.N. and in other ways to try to pursue this. We hope that we will be able to do it in strong cooperation with the Japanese, who have helped us every step of the way, and with the Chinese, who have played a very constructive role in this. And I would also hope that Russia will be able to help in this process. I first raised this whole issue, Korean issue, with President Yeltsin some time ago. 
And so we and the South Koreans are working to try to get the cooperation of all these parties and others. But in the end, the North Koreans will have to decide whether they wish to be completely isolated or not or whether they will just keep their commitments and, in return for simply keeping commitments they've already made, have the opportunity to integrate their nation into a broader and far more prosperous world. 
The President. Nothing could be further from the truth. We have done nothing offensive to North Korea. All of our military moves, indeed, the Patriot missile, has been entirely defensive. And any actions that we would support in that regard would be actions to which we have been forced by the North Koreans simply because they have declined to keep commitments that they themselves have made. 
If we're going to do business in this world, people have got to be able to rely on the commitments that countries freely undertake. And again, I would say the way is still open to North Korea simply to follow the commitments they've already made. There are ways they can do that. We are going to work very closely with the South Koreans, but I think we have to be firm and persistent and just keep working at it, and we intend to do that. 
The President. Well, I don't want to characterize it in that way. I'll just say that we and the South Koreans are exploring, with all the relevant parties, what our options are, and we'll see what develops over the next few days. 
The President. Well, we'll have to see where China comes down on it in the end. The Chinese have always been somewhat more cautious because of their longstanding relationship with North Korea. And also they have—I think they are genuine in not wanting to do anything which provokes some sort of crisis. 
On the other hand, I would remind you that the Chinese certainly don't want North Korea to become a clear nuclear power because of the consequences that might have for them as well as for Japan. And the Chinese are now doing 8 or 10 times as much business with South Korea as with North Korea. So, their long-term economic interests clearly are in pursuing a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula in which North and South Korea are ultimately partners and both trading with a more prosperous China. 
So I think their long-term objectives, security and economic, are consistent with what our long-term objectives are. So I hope that we can work through this crisis. But in the end, I will say again, the Chinese, no different from any other country, should want all nations who give their word to keep it. 
The President. No, I really don't think so. I don't think that has anything to do with this whatever


Remarks in a Town Meeting in Charlotte, North Carolina
April 5, 1994

Now, the question is: What should we do with North Korea? This is a very serious thing. North Korea has said they want a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. North Korea has said they want to get along with South Korea. It is the most isolated regime in the world today. Nobody wants them to develop nuclear weapons, not China, their old ally. China doesn't want them to become a nuclear power. Japan doesn't want them to become a nuclear power because they don't want to have to think about developing nuclear weapons. South Korea certainly doesn't. Seoul, South Korea, by far the biggest city in South Korea, is very close to the North Korean border. 
The question, sir, is: What is the proper way to try to get North Korea to comply? And what we have done is to try to work very closely first with the South Koreans—whatever we do, we have to do in partnership with them—and with the Japanese and the Chinese, pushing firmly, firmly, firmly, to get the inspections. We got more inspections. They didn't do everything they promised to do, and so now we've got the United Nations to make a very strong statement that they have to do it. If they don't do it, we'll continue to go forward. 
But this is a very delicate thing. It's easy to talk about and difficult to do. North Korea and South Korea are right there together; their armies are facing each other. Seoul is a very big city on the border of North Korea. And we've got to work closely with the South Koreans and the others, and we're going to be very, very firm about it. But if I say we're going to do something, we're going to do it. I'm not going to threaten something that we're not prepared to do. I think what we should do is say less and do more in international politics. 
The President. Well, the intelligence community believes now something they did not believe at that time, which is that they may have a rudimentary nuclear weapon which may or may not even be deliverable, but which may be a bomb in a literal sense. That may or may not have happened. You've seen that in the press. 
We have to see what our options are. One of the things we can do is to continue to put economic pressure on North Korea. But if we do it through the United Nations, we have to carry along with us the South Koreans. After all, the South Koreans have the biggest stake. We have the next biggest stake because we have 40,000 soldiers in Korea. The next biggest stake is in the Japanese who are right there handy. And we have a lot of options short of the military option to continue to make it a very painful decision for the North Koreans to do. So we have notruled out any of our options, and we will continue to press. 
The President. Well, there's all kinds of economic—well, no, we haven't imposed economic sanctions yet. 
The President. They may or may not. They may or may not. Economic sanctions have done a lot of damage in the places where they've been imposed. They just don't have immediate results. 
The President. It's not very—actually, it depends on how you define self-sufficiency. It's not doing—they're not doing very well. 
The President. Well, that's right. So if they do even worse, then they'll have to pay a price for their irresponsible conduct. The thing I said to the North Koreans through formal and informal channels is, what are they getting for this? They get nothing for this. They literally are getting nothing. All they're doing is becoming more and more isolated. They're making themselves poorer. They're making themselves more alienated. Even the Chinese don't agree with what they're doing. 
China now is doing 10 times as much business with South Korea as North Korea. So what we have to do is to try to find a way to reach them, get them to come to their senses, keep the commitments they've made. But it's very easy to talk tough here. You have to think about what the consequences are. I am determined to keep putting the pressure on, but I do not believe it serves any useful purpose to inflame the situation with rhetoric. That's what the North Koreans have done; it's a big mistake. We are sending Patriot missiles there. We can resume our military exercises there. We can impose stiffer economic sanctions. We have a lot of options there that we can still explore

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters in Minneapolis
April 8, 1994

The President. Well, we do. My belief is that any successor government will keep working closely with us on North Korea and keep in close touch with us on China and keep working with us with China on North Korea. I believe that will happen. I would be surprised if that did not happen.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the American Society of Newspaper Editors
April 13, 1994

The future of our American leadership depends upon what we do at home, but also what we do abroad. Last year among the most important developments were the trade agreements, the NAFTA agreement, the GATT agreement, the historic meeting we had with the leaders of the Asian-Pacific communities. But we have a lot of problems, too. By attempting to come to grips with them in a world increasingly disorderly, we hope to preserve an environment in which America can grow and Americans can flourish, whether it is in addressing North Korea's nuclear program, which protects not only our troops on the Peninsula but ultimately the interests of all Americans, or supporting reforms in the Soviet Union, which helps to destroy missiles once aimed at us and to create new market opportunities for the future, or by harnessing NATO's power and the service of diplomacy in troubled Bosnia, which will help to prevent a wider war and contain a flood of refugees. Our efforts to stop the shelling of Sarajevo and the attacks on Gorazde, to bring the Serbs back to the negotiating table, to build on the agreement made by the Croats and the Bosnian Muslims, enhanced both Europe's security and our own


The President's Radio Address
April 30, 1994
There are other threats today that also demand our active engagement, from North Korea's nuclear program to the efforts of Iran and other backlash states to sponsor terrorism. We're meeting those threats with steadiness and resolve


Interview on CNN's "Global Forum With President Clinton"
May 3, 1994

There are regimes, such as Iraq, Iran, and North Korea, who persist in working to develop weapons of mass destruction. We see brutal human rights abuses from Haiti to Rwanda and dire humanitarian and environmental problems from the sweeping AIDS epidemic and desertification in Africa to deforestation in Latin America and Asia

We're continuing to reduce the world's nuclear dangers, working to end North Korea's dangerous nuclear program. We started negotiations on a comprehensive test ban. When I took office, four former Soviet republics had nuclear weapons. We succeeded with three of them in nailing down commitments to eliminate their entire nuclear arsenals. And we are proceeding in that important work. And now, for the very first time, our nuclear missiles are no longer targeted at Russia, nor theirs at us.

The President. Well, I think it is a very serious situation. And let me say, first of all, it is a very serious situation because North Korea has agreed to be a nonnuclear state, to follow nonproliferation policies. Because it has nuclear resources, it has agreed in the past to submit to the international inspections of the IAEA. There has been a lot of trouble about that, as you know, as well as about how to resume a dialog between North Korea and South Korea. I would say to you, sir, that the options we have are largely again in the hands of the North Koreans themselves. North Korea can choose, and I hope they will. 
And I would say this to the North Koreans— I believe we have North Koreans watching us tonight—I would say to you: The United States wishes to have friendly and open relationships with you. We wish to have a constructive relationship. We want you to have a constructive relationship with South Korea. You in North Korea have pledged yourselves to a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. That's what we want. If there is a policy of isolation pursued by us, it will only be because you decide not to follow through on the commitments you have already made to honor international inspections and to be a nonnuclear state. 
The options are, I think, clear. But they are not easy. No one wishes this confrontation. But neither does one wish to have a state not only with nuclear power but with a capacity to proliferate nuclear weapons to other nations. It is a very serious potential situation. We intend to stand firm and to keep working with our allies, South Koreans, the Japanese, working with the Chinese and others, to reach a good solution to this. 
Our hand is still out to the people of North Korea and to the leaders of North Korea. But we expect the commitment that North Korea made to be a nonnuclear state to be honored. 
The President. At a minimum, North Korea will be much more isolated, in a much more tenuous position. And the relationships between the North Koreans and South Korea will be strained, I think, irrevocably in many ways. And the problems that North Korea will then have with their neighbors in Japan as well as with their friends in China will be very significant. The least that would happen is that they would be much, much more severely isolated and they would run a risk of having more difficult things happen. And their rhetoric has recognized that. 
I think this is another one of those issues— it's in the hands of the North Koreans. But we have reached out the hand of friendship and cooperation, and we know the South Koreans wish to do the same. It does not really make sense for the North Koreans to pursue this path of isolation. They can have more prosperity, more security, and more prestige by abandoning this nuclear program that they have already promised to abandon than by going forward with it, and I hope they will


Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Meeting With Military Leaders
May 19, 1994

The President. Well, let me say I certainly cannot answer that first question in the affirmative. That's why we have inspectors there now. And they are working hard, and as far as we know, they're—I got a report this morning— they are proceeding with their inspections. They should be in a position to give us a report imminently, in the near future. So I don't think you'll have to wait long for an answer to that. But the inspectors are there and working, and we should know more about it. And I think that the better course of action is for all of us to refrain from any kind of comment until we know what the facts are, because we will have the facts soon.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister P.V. Narasimha Rao of India
May 19, 1994

The President. Let me tell you, first of all, I have nothing to add to what I said when I met with the Joint Chiefs this morning about that. I want to make sure that I have the facts from the inspectors and that the facts are there. When I know what the facts are, I will then make a statement about them. 
I think it would be an error for North Korea to continue to thwart these inspections after they have agreed to comply with them. But I want to know what the facts are. And when I do, then I will make a more definitive statement



Remarks at the United States Naval Academy Commencement Ceremony in Annapolis, Maryland
May 25, 1994

At the end of the cold war it was right to reduce our defense spending. But let us not forget that this new era has many dangers. We have replaced a cold war threat of a world of nuclear gridlock with a new world threatened with instability, even abject chaos, rooted in the economic dislocations that are inherent in the change from communism to market economics, rooted in religious and ethnic battles long covered over by authoritarian regimes now gone, rooted in tribal slaughters, aggravated by environmental disasters, by abject hunger, by mass migration across tenuous national borders. And with three of the Soviet Union's successor states now becoming nonnuclear and the tension between the U.S. and Russia over nuclear matters declining, we still must not forget that the threat of weapons of mass destruction remain in the continuing disputes we have over North Korea and elsewhere with countries who seek either to develop or to sell or to buy such weapons. So we must, we must do better. For this generation to expand freedom's reach, we must always keep America out of danger's reach.


The President's News Conference
May 26, 1994
I think we have to see our relations with China within the broader context of our policies in the Asian-Pacific region, a region that, after all, includes our own Nation. This week, we've seen encouraging developments, progress on resolving trade frictions with the Japanese and possible progress towards stopping North Korea's nuclear program. I am determined to see that we maintain an active role in this region in both its dynamic economic growth and in its security


Remarks to American Seminarians in Vatican City
June 2, 1994

We talked for quite a long while about Asia, about the need to protect religious freedoms in Asian countries and to promote that. And I pledged to the Pope my best efforts to work with other nations, especially nations in Asia, in the cause of religious freedom. We talked about the challenges presented at the moment by the dispute we're having with North Korea.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy in Rome
June 2, 1994

The President. Yes. First of all, let me try to reiterate here what I said when I was at the Vatican meeting with the American seminarians, and some of you covered that. His Holiness raised a number of questions that we discussed at great length, including a long discussion of his concern about what is happening in the Islamic states and how we can work with them in a more cooperative way, and then a long discussion about what is going on in Asia, China, Japan, and North Korea. I would say those two subjects probably took up more time than any other part of our discussion

The President. Let me see if I can remember all of that. First of all, North Korea has said many things—that sanctions would be viewed as an act of aggression, that something bad might happen, that maybe they'll withdraw from the NPT—in an attempt somehow to shift the focus from their actions to the rest of the world. This is not about the rest of the world; this is about North Korea. 
North Korea is a mature country governed by mature people who freely undertook the obligations of participation in the NPT. They did that. No one made them do it. They did it. Now they cannot have it both ways. They can't say, "Well, we'll stay in the NPT but only if we're not required to assume the obligations of membership and only if we can violate the obligations we freely undertook without anybody reacting to it." 
Well, we're not, any of us, permitted to conduct ourselves that way. So this is about North Korea's conduct, not about the United States or Britain or France or Russia or China. It is about their conduct. 
The second question is, I think that if the IAEA certifies that it is no longer possible to determine whether any of the fuel from the defueling in 1989 was diverted, and that in their judgment that means they cannot in good conscience go forward with just looking prospectively at what might happen, what that would say is that—the United States and the world community has worked with North Korea on this issue for 5 years now—and I believe, therefore, the question of sanctions has to be at least taken up in the United Nations Security Council and discussed. 
And I must say, I was quite encouraged by what President Yeltsin said today with President Kim in Moscow. That is, he says he thinks we ought to—as you know, he's been calling for some time for a meeting, which also should be discussed in the context of the U.N. But he said—this is the first time I believe Russia has said publicly—that if negotiations are clearly going to be unsuccessful, that Russia would support sanctions. The Chinese have continued to say, as the closest ally of North Korea, that they are trying to get North Korea to comply, that North Korea ought to comply, but that they hope there will be a diplomatic solution. 
They have not yet said that they would veto a sanctions resolution. So what I think the United States should be doing—and I believe Britain and France agree with this, although I will have a chance to discuss this with them in the next few days—I think we should just— if the IAEA certifies that the chain of proof is broken, that they cannot establish what has happened, then the question of sanctions will have to be moved to the U.N. Security Council, and we will have to discuss all these issues. 
But this is because of North Korea's conduct, not because of Mr. Blix and the IAEA, not because of the U.S. or Russia or China or Britain or France. This is about North Korea's conduct. And I think we have to go forward. They have triggered these events, not the United States or anyone else. We have to go forward. 
The President. Oh, His Holiness basically was more concerned about—he wanted to know what I thought about them. And he was concerned about the whole issue of religious freedom throughout Asia, in North Korea. He said, you know, North Korea's clearly the most closed society. But he was interested in religious freedom in China, in Vietnam and all other parts of Asia, and in whether Europe and the United States would be able to have the kind of partnerships in Asia, specifically with Japan and with China, that would enable us to go into the 21st century continuing to support the move of democracy there. That was his general concern. And he asked me what I thought was going to happen to the Asian economies—of whether they would continue their explosive growth for the next three decades. That's basically what he asked. 
The President. Well, on the second question, I think they're on the line every day, and they're always under challenge. This is a difficult time. 
Let me say a little something about the first question. There are two issues here. One is that a Communist country and an isolated one freely undertook to join the NPT in what I believe at the time was a decision they had made to move toward integrating themselves more closely with the world community and trying to reconcile their historic differences with South Korea. 
That is the direction that, frankly, has been very welcome, not just by me personally but by my predecessors and by the United States generally. And we have made it very clear that there is a future of genuine partnership with North Korea not simply with South Korea but with the United States and with the rest of the world in the context of a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula. That was the path. But when that path was taken, there were certain obligations assumed. And it seems to me that the world community cannot just simply look away from those obligations. 
The second issue is, what are the consequences of the North Korea policy, because they will say, "Well, what about India? What about Pakistan? What about other nonmembers of the NPT?" The difference is, of course, if this country is changing path and going back to an isolationist and to a hostile path, what could they do, maybe not today or tomorrow but a few years from now with the material that they might produce along with their wellknown capacity to produce missiles? Who else might wind up with it? So it's a very serious question. 
And all I can tell you is that I have been impressed by the gravity with which the other members of the United Nations Security Council, including Russia and China, have approached it. I recognize it is a more difficult question for China and for Russia than for the United States and for Britain and for France. It also matters a lot to Japan and to South Korea. I think we all have a common desire to see North Korea return to the former path. And I believe that in the end when we move to the Security Council discussions, we will come out with a policy that will show resolve and that will do that. I just don't think we can walkaway from this. And so, I am hopeful, but I realize it is a difficult and a challenging issue

Remarks on the Economy and an Exchange With Reporters in Rome
June 3, 1994

The President. No, I have not talked to President Yeltsin or President Kim, but I will today. And I don't think I should—I have nothing to add to what I said yesterday except to tell you that I will talk to them, and after I do I'll be glad to—— 
The President. I don't want to say anything about President Yeltsin or President Kim until I talk to them today. I have to talk—— 
The President. I have nothing to add to what I've already said about it right now. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With Prime Minister John Major in North Aylesbury, United Kingdom
June 4, 1994

The President. First of all, North Korea's actions have, in my view, made it virtually imperative that the Security Council consider the question of sanctions. They did that. They freely undertook obligations as a part of the NPT. They repeatedly said that they did not wish to be a nuclear power and that they were committed to a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula. 
We have offered any number of inducements or supports to try to achieve that goal, and nothing has been forthcoming. The IAEA inspections were notallowed to proceed. And so I think we have to proceed in the Security Council. There's still time for North Korea to avoid sanctions actually taking effect if we can work out something on the nuclear inspections, but this is in their hands. I think that clearly sanctions are not any sort of act of war and should not be seen as such. 
The President. Well, as you know, we have taken some steps to support the capacity of our troops to fulfill their mission there already. And I have had continuing talks, as you would expect I would have, with Secretary Perry and General Shalikashvili. When we had the commanders in chiefs in recently and General Luck and others talked with me extensively about this, we are— [inaudible]—prepared to do our duty. 
I do not want a lot of saber rattling over this or war talk. This is a peace talk. This should be about peace. We're trying to enforce the requirements of the NPT to which North Korea voluntarily pledged its allegiance. All we want them to do is keep their word, and we're going to try to give them chances to do it

Interview With Wolf Blitzer of CNN
June 5, 1994

The President. Well, that's largely up to them. The important thing is that they agreed several years ago to be part of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which means that they agreed to subject themselves to inspections that would enable the rest of the world to determine whether they were diverting nuclear fuel from their reactors that would be used to make nuclear weapons or could be. They have subjected themselves to those inspections now as it relates to anything they could do from now into the future. But they still haven't been willing to subject themselves to appropriate inspections relating to removals they did in 1989. 
Is it serious at the moment? Perhaps not. Could it be used to make a bomb and could that bomb be used either against their neighbors in South Korea or maybe be sold to another rogue state? Perhaps so. So we're being very firm. We're moving toward the United Nations Security Council with a sanctions resolution. We're engaging our allies and others in the area that have a real interest in this. I think both China and Japan, as well as Russia and South Korea, clearly do not want North Korea to be a nuclear state. And we're doing the best we can to head it off. 
The President. Well, we have created many, many such opportunities, and they've rejected them all. After all, we've worked real hard to get these negotiations on track. And the North Koreans did in fact allow the inspections that would enable us to tell today about what they could do tomorrow. It is the past that they don't want to permit us to look into. And they still will have significant numbers of opportunities before they'll be, I think, hurt by the sanctions. But we have to go forward with the sanctions resolution, I think. 
The President. Well, there's a window, and the window—of course, there's nothing to stop them from reaching an accommodation from now on into the future. But I think we have to move ahead now. 
The incentives are enormous. When North Korea decided to join the nonproliferation group and say we won't make atomic weapons and we want you to inspect, they made a bigger decision. Their decision was, we're going to reach out to the rest of the world, not withdraw from it. They made a decision they would try to work out their problems with South Korea, that they wanted a relationship with the United States and Japan as well as with China and Russia. Now China and Russia have both changed. They've moved closer to our way of thinking, and the North Koreans, for reasons we don't understand, are seeming to move in the other way. 
The door is still open for them to become part of the world community, and that's what we want. And I think that's in their national interest. It's good for their people; it's good for their prestige. 
The President. It's hard to know what they're doing. All I know is that our actions all along have been dictated by their actions. That is, we have not sought a confrontation with them. We have been very firm. We have a treaty obligation to South Korea. Our interests are tied to South Korea's security. And ourcommitment, our solemn word is tied there. 
But more importantly, North Korea promised not to become a nuclear power. They're still isolated. They're still very Communist. They still deal with a lot of rogue states that support terrorism. And so we're just responding to their actions. But the door is always open for them to take a different path, and we hope they will

Interview With Harry Smith of CBS News
June 5, 1994

The President. We're going to take the sanctions debate to the United Nations. There is still time for North Korea to change its course. There is still time for North Korea to work with other countries. It's important that the American people understand what's at stake here. They agreed, North Korea did, not to become a nuclear power. Since I've been President they have let us inspect, because we worked very hard at it, all their facilities for what they're doing now and what they might do in the near future. They have notpermitted us to go back and inspect for what they did back in 1989 before I took office. 
The international inspectors say that means they could divert and may have already diverted nuclear fuel for nuclear weapons. Now, they gave their word they wouldn't do that, and they gave their word they'd let us inspect. They deal with a lot of countries that are rogue countries that promote terrorism. We feel that they ought to keep their word. And if they don't, then we feel we have to seek sanctions. But they can still turn away. 
The President. Well, they say that, but they keep trying to blame other people for their behavior, Mature, disciplined adults can't do that. They have to take responsibility for their own behavior. They cannot anymore blame us for their behavior. This is about their behavior, not mine. I approached them in the spirit of peace. I was elated when they joined this nonproliferation group, when they said, "We want to work our differences out with South Korea; we want a relationship with the rest of the world." I would like to have a relationship with North Korea. I would like for them to work out their differences with South Korea. But that's up to them, not me. 
The President. Well, I don't want to join their escalation of words. We have a treaty commitment that commits us to the security of South Korea. They are our friends; they are our allies. There are American soldiers today on the DMZ. I have visited them there. They are brave; they're good people; they're doing their job. And we will honor our treaty commitments. 
But we are not trying to provoke North Korea. We are only asking them to do what they have already promised to do. And if they will keep their promise, the promises of the West and of Japan and of South Korea and now even of China and Russia who do not want them to do this, to be a part of a great world community—[inaudible]. These people have talent. They have achieved some things. They have quite a lot of technological proficiency, even though they're very poor economically. They've done well in other things. We want them to come be a part of our world, not to run away from it


Interview With Sam Donaldson of ABC News
June 5, 1994

The President. Let me first say that the American people need to understand what's at stake here. They agreed not to become a nuclear power. They have honored the testing requirements for what they've done since I've been in office. But they still haven't allowed us to test for what they did in 1989. Under those circumstances, I don't think we have any choice but to go to the United Nations for sanctions. I have talked with President Yeltsin, along with Prime Minister Major and the new Prime Minister of Italy, Mr. Berlusconi. I'm going to see the French leaders the day after tomorrow. We are in touch with the Chinese. 
I believe there is a general sense in the world community that we have to go forward with a sanctions resolution in the United Nations. I don't want to say what I'll do if we lose there because I'm not prepared to say we will lose there. I think most people know and believe that the North Koreans should cooperate on this. After all, they promised to do it. We're just asking them to keep their word. 
The President. Well, there is—we would not have to go it alone. The real question is could we have what has been called a coalition of the willing that included as many nations as would observe the sanctions as possible? The answer to that is we would certainly consider that if we failed at the United Nations. But keep in mind, China and Russia have both moved toward the West. And both have interests like Japan's, South Korea's, and the United States. None of us wish North Korea to be a nuclear power. And all of us know they promised they wouldn't be one. All of us know they still deal with other rogue states who support terrorists. And we don't think this is a very good trend. So I think we'll work together. I predict to you that we'll work out a common course. And of course what I hope is that the North Koreans will turn away and come back to us. 
The President. I don't think that they would risk the certain terrible defeat and destruction that would occur if they did that. But we can't afford to assume anything. That is, what I have tried to do is to make sure our people are well prepared and well disciplined for all eventualities, as they have been, I think, throughout their presence in Korea. 
General Luck asked me for some extra support, and we've provided that. And I'm confident we're there, prepared to do our job. But I don't want any war talk. I want this to be about peace talk. What happens in North Korea and to North Korea is a function of what North Korea does, not the rest of us. 
The President. No, the answer to that is no. The answer is we are in South Korea. We have a solemn commitment to them. They are our allies. They are certainly prepared to go forward in the United Nations; so are we. 
Senator Dole says they're bluffing when they consider sanctions to be an act of war; I think that may be the opinion most people have. But nonetheless, we are going to be extra prepared. We want to do what we can to do our mission and to protect the American troops there as much as possible. I just don't want to raise any red flags of fear. We need to be very firm, very resolute, and go forward. 
I'm talking to the other world leaders about it. I think we will go forward. 


Interview With Tom Brokaw of NBC News
June 5, 1994

The President. No. I don't think that's what's going on. I think that they may think that the world community won't impose sanctions on them, but I think the world community will impose sanctions if they don't—— 
The President. We won't have to do it on our own. There will be lots of countries there willing to help us, the so-called coalition of willing. I prefer to have the United Nations take the appropriate action because we know that Russia and China on the Security Council agree with us on this issue. They don't want North Korea to become a nuclear power. And they know North Korea promised not to become a nuclear power. So I prefer to do it that way. 
But we are going to proceed firmly on this. I hope and believe the U.N. will do it. If it doesn't, then we'll look at who else wants to do it and what else we can do. But we can't turn away from this. This is not about the United States; this is about North Korea. They promised that they wouldn't be a nuclear power. They promised to let us inspect. I will say this, since I've been President we've engaged them more, and we have been able to inspect now. What is at issue here is the inspections they did notallow back in 1989 and what they're going to do about it and whether that gives them the ability to make nuclear weapons. Now, since they still deal with countries that we know are rogue states and support terrorism, that's of great concern to us. That is a big issue for the American people and the long-term security of the world. So we've got to be firm here. 
Will the United Nations support us? I believe they will. If they don't, what will we do? I think there are other options open to us. But we cannot just walkaway from this. 
The President. I'm not sure of that. They have said that they would consider sanctions an act of war, but I don't really believe that. Keep in mind there are lots of countries in the world that have nuclear programs. When President Kennedy was President, he thought by this time two dozen countries would be nuclear powers. We don't have two dozen nuclear powers because the United States and our allies have worked very hard to reduce the number of nuclear powers. North Korea promised they wouldn't do it. We're just asking them to keep their word to be part of the world community, to reach out and grow. 
You know, the ultimate sanction is going to be for them to decide what kind of country they want to be. Do they want to be isolated and alone and impoverished, or do they want to work out their relationship with South Korea, with the United States, ultimately now with Japan, with China, with Russia. Everybody is saying, "Come on and be part of this world. Don't withdraw and be part of a dark future." And I still believe there's a chance they'll come back. But we just have to steadily keep on the course we're on. It is dictated by their behavior, not by ours.


Exchange With Reporters During a Meeting With Mayor Jacques Chirac of Paris, France
June 7, 1994

The President. Not particularly. They've argued about the armistice setup for some years on and off. I don't—we're not in a good position there, as you know. Our relationships with them are not the best now because of this problem. And we're proceeding with the United Nations as we should. But I don't—this doesn't add any particular extra element to it


Remarks With Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of France and an Exchange With Reporters in Paris
June 7, 1994

The President. We did discuss North Korea, of course. And I reaffirmed the position of the United States that the Security Council must take up this question and consider a sanctions resolution. 
I believe that the Prime Minister agrees with that position. You might want to ask him, but I was very satisfied with the response with regard to North Korea. Of course, France's position on this is pivotal, since it is one of the permanent members of the Security Council


Remarks on North Korea and an Exchange With Reporters
June 15, 1994

The President. Let me say I'm very pleased to have this opportunity for another meeting with the bipartisan leadership. We will be discussing a number of issues today, but let me mention one in particular, North Korea. 
Ambassador Albright will be beginning her discussions today at the United Nations about a sanctions resolution which we proposed which would include phased sanctions designed to deal not only with the actions of the North Koreans to date but as a deterrent to future destructive conduct with regard to the IAEA and the NPT. So we're going to be very deliberate, very firm. I feel that we are pursuing the proper course at this time. 
The President. I think he will reaffirm our position. What I'm more hopeful of is that he will get a better sense from them about where they are, and they will understand that we are very firm in our position, but that there is an alternative path and a very good one for North Korea to take, that they don't have to become more isolated, they could become more engaged in the world in ways that would be much better for their own people. 
The President. I don't think that. I think that apparently they're pursuing a course of their own interests, which at least to the rest of us seems self-defeating. I believe that if you look at what—if you imagine where the people of North Korea might be 10 or 20 years from now, they would be far better off and more prosperous, engaged in the world, rather than isolated from it, being rewarded for their work rather than for some—— 
The President. No. We're proceeding ahead. We're consulting with our allies, we're working with—we think that we're doing theright thing. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters on North Korea
June 16, 1994

In recent weeks, we have been consulting with our allies and friends on the imposition of sanctions against North Korea because of its refusal to permit full inspections of its nuclear program. Today there are reports that the North Koreans, in discussions with President Carter, may have offered new steps to resolve the international community's concerns, saying that International Atomic Energy Agency inspectors and monitoring equipment would be left in place and that North Korea desires to replace its present nuclear program with a new light water reactor technology that is more resistant to nuclear proliferation. 
If North Korea means by this, also, that it is willing to freeze its nuclear program while talks take place, this could be a promising development. As we review these reports today and in the days ahead, I want to take a moment to explain the extent of our interests and the steps we are taking to protect them. 
Our Nation clearly has vitalinterests on the Korean Peninsula. Four decades after the conflict there that claimed hundreds of thousands of South Korean and American lives, South Korea continues to face a threat of a million troops, most of them massed near its border. 
Americascommitment [orginally America’s; replaced for Yoshikoder] to South Korea, our treaty ally, our trading partner, our fellow democracy, is unshakable. We have some 37,000 American troops in Korea to maintain that commitment, and their safety is of vital importance to us. 
We also have an interest in preserving the stability of the Asian-Pacific region. And we have a compelling interest in preserving the integrity of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and to prevent the spread of global nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. 
Therefore, in response to North Korea's nuclear activities, we have consistently pursued two goals: a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula and a strong international nonproliferation regime. We've made serious and extensive efforts to resolve the North Korean issue through negotiations and have given North Korea many opportunities to return to compliance with its own nonproliferation commitments, made first 9 years ago when North Korea signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and in 1991, when North Korea agreed with South Korea to pursue a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula. 
We've made clear that these negotiations could continue, but only if North Korea cooperated with the International Atomic Energy Agency and did not deepen its violation of international nuclear safeguards. If today's developments mean that North Korea is genuinely and verifiably prepared to freeze its nuclear program while talks go on—and we hope that is the case—then we would be willing to resume highlevel talks. In the meantime, we will pursue our consultations on sanctions at the United Nations. 
In recent weeks I've consulted—or days, in recent days I've consulted with President Kim of South Korea, Prime Minister Hata of Japan, President Yeltsin of Russia, and others. I will continue to consult closely with them on this matter, with other international leaders and, of course, with Members of Congress of both parties. 
Through all appropriate means, I will keep working to ensure the security of South Korea, the safety of our troops, the stability of the Asian-Pacific, and the protection of our Nation, our friends, and our allies from the spread of nuclear weapons. 
There is a great deal at stake. We are pursuing our interests with resolve and steadiness. We are hopeful that this development today will be positive, and we are awaiting further evidence. 
The President. Well, the answer to the second question is, yes, time is a factor. The answer to the first question is, yes, we believe we would be able to know, based on the representations that were apparently made today whether they have, in fact, frozen their program while talks continue. 
The President. Well, we'll just have to see. These discussions occurred today; there will be more discussions tomorrow, tomorrow Korean time, which is there now. And we will just have to see. But it depends on what the Koreans actually meant by what they said today, and we will have to see. 
So Ambassador Albright continued today pursuing our consultations on sanctions with the nonpermanent members of the Security Council of the United Nations, and we are proceeding and we're just going to watch developments. 
The President. No. It depends on what they mean. That's why we're being very clear today to say that we want to know what they meant by their representation and whether it represents a change of position. If it is a different position on which we can honorably resume negotiations, knowing, in fact, that there will be no development of the nuclear program while we are having discussions with them, then it is not an inappropriate delay. Then it is a genuine effort to resolve disputes which could lead to a safer world at a much lower cost. It simply depends on what their intentions and actions are. 
The President. Oh, I intend to debrief him when he comes back. I absolutely do. And I talked to him before he went, personally. 
The President. Absolutely. So—— 
The President. No. Well, I think it's been important in this whole development for the way it's unfolded that he was invited there as a citizen, as a representative of the Carter Center, to have a dialog, not as a representative of the Government but as someone who could see Kim Il-song and could have a detailed conversation with him. And I think that the way this has unfolded proves that, at least that some—we have gotten some information there that might not have otherwise been the case. So I don't have any problem with it. 
But I think it is important that the United States and its interests can only be stated by people who are ultimately charged with doing that. And I think that President Carter fully agreed with the characterization of his role and his mission. That is the way he wanted it as well as the way we wanted it, and we think that that gives us some possibility that something will come out of this. Whether it will or not, we still don't know. 
The President. First, we will do whateverisnecessary to protect our own forces there and to fulfill ourcommitments to the South Koreans. 
I met recently with all the commanders-inchief, including General Luck, our commander in South Korea. I met today, again, with the Secretary of Defense and General Shalikashvili to discuss this and other issues. And we will take appropriate steps as we should, as we must. So there is nothing to be concerned about. 
Now, on the other issue, what happens here depends upon whether this is, in fact, a new development. That is really what is at stake. Will it take the steam out of sanctions? Not if there is nothing new here. If there is a genuine prospect for not only leaving the IAEA monitors and equipment in place and moving away from the present nuclear technology, which is very susceptible to proliferation, to a light water technology, which is less susceptible, in an environment in which—and I stress—in an environment in which there is a freeze on any nuclear activities, then the international community will be able to pursue its objectives of adherence by North Korea to the NPT, thwarting the proliferation of nuclear weapons, achieving the agreement North Korea made for a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula in an appropriate way. 
It depends on the facts. It all depends on the facts, and that is what we will attempt to determine over the next several hours. 

Exchange With Reporters at a Chicago Housing Authority Police Substation
June 17, 1994

The President. No, I gave my position yesterday; that hasn't changed. The position I stated yesterday has not changed. 
The President. I made my statement yesterday. You have to rely on my statement. I was very clear, very unambiguous. None of us have talked directly with President Carter. We don't know what he said. And I don't think—I don't think you should—[inaudible
The President. I don't know what he said, and I don't know that you know what he said. All I know is what I said, and what I said is the policy of the United States of America. 
The President. I explained yesterday what the conditions for resuming negotiations and suspending the pursuit of sanctions were. Nothing has changed. That is the policy of the United States

Remarks to the Community at Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago
June 17, 1994

You know, I have to say this just for a moment. I was a little late coming to Illinois yesterday because I spent most of the day working on our differences with North Korea over their nuclear program. A major part of my job is dealing with the security of this country, the national security. But it's also important to recognize that this Nation's security also depends upon whether the children who live here in Robert Taylor Homes can go to sleep at night safe and get up and go to school in the morning safe. That is a big part of our national security as well


Interview With Katie Couric and Bryant Gumbel on "Today"
June 20, 1994

The President. Well, the North Koreans asked President Carter to come as a private citizen. 
He called me, and we agreed that the trip might be productive, that he would go, he would listen, he would faithfully state the views of our administration and reaffirm that our interest is in seeing that North Korea honor its commitments under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and its commitment to a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. 
While there, when he notified us about what they were saying, we put out a statement, which he reaffirmed, which simply said that if North Korea wishes to talk and is willing to freeze their nuclear program, that is, not continue reprocessing or refueling while they talk, then that would be a step forward. He says that Kim Il-song made that commitment to him. Now we have to verify that. So that's the question. 
We have, surely, something to gain by talking with the North Koreans, by avoiding further steps toward a crisis. But we have to know there's been a change. So we'll be looking to verify that. And that's really the question. This is a question of fact now. 
There are some hopeful signs, the willingness to meet between North and South. But the critical question is, are they willing to freeze this nuclear program while we try to work these differences out? 
The President. Well, I think what we have to do is to look to the present and the future and say we will evaluate words in terms of actions. We have the capacity, if the international inspectors and the equipment are going to be left there, to evaluate whether, in fact, the nuclear program has been frozen. If it's going to be frozen, then clearly that is grounds for talking. But we have to know what the facts are, and we'll be attempting to determine that.


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Arpad Goncz of Hungary and President Michal Kovac of Slovakia
June 21, 1994

The President. Well, we have a channel of communications to them. And we have followed up President Carter's statements to me and his letter of understanding with a communication to the North Koreans, and we will be waiting to hear back. And we expect and hope to hear back within a couple of days about whether President Carter's understanding of what they said is correct


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters on North Korea
June 22, 1994

The President. Good afternoon. Today I want to announce an important step forward in the situation in North Korea. This afternoon we have received formal confirmation from North Korea that it will freeze the major elements of its nuclear program while a new round of talks between our nations proceeds. 
In response, we are informing the North Koreans that we are ready to go forward with a new round of talks in Geneva early next month. North Korea has assured us that while we go forward with these talks it will not reload its 5-megawatt reactor with new fuel or reprocess spent fuel. We have also been assured that the IAEA will be allowed to keep its inspectors and monitoring equipment in place at the Yongbyon nuclear facility, thus allowing verification of North Korea's agreement. We welcome this very positive development which restores the basis for talks between North Korea and the United States. 
In addition to addressing the nuclear issue, we are prepared to discuss the full range of security, political, and economic issues that affects North Korea's relationship with the international community. During these discussions we will suspend our efforts to pursue a sanctions resolution in the United Nations Security Council. We also welcome the agreement between South Korea and North Korea to pursue a meeting between their Presidents. 
I would like to thank President Carter for the important role he played in helping to achieve this step. These developments mark not a solution to the problem, but they do mark a new opportunity to find a solution. It is the beginning of a new stage in our efforts to pursue a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula. We hope this will lead to the resolution of all the issues that divide Korea from the international community. 
In close consultation with our allies, we will continue as we have over the past year and more to pursue our interests and our goals with steadiness, realism, and resolve. This approach is paying off, and we will continue it. This is good news. Our task now is to transform this news into a lasting agreement. 
The President. Well, let me say that, first of all, we have been in touch with the North Koreans in New York almost at this moment. We will set up these talks, and we will have ample opportunity to discuss the range of issues that will be discussed in the talks. And we expect to discuss, obviously, all the issues that have divided us. 
The President. We talked to him for a long time on the telephone. The only reason we didn't is because I didn't want to ask him to come all the way up to Camp David, and we had planned to go up there for the weekend. And he decided and I decided there was—we know each other very well; we've known each other for 20 years—we decided we didn't need to do it; we could just have a long talk on the phone, and that's what we did. 
The President. No. 
The President. No. The only thing that we said was that we would suspend our efforts to pursue sanctions if there was a verifiable freeze on the nuclear program while the talks continued, which included no refueling of the reactor and no reprocessing. 
When President Carter came back he said— this was the cautionary note, you know, I raised in Chicago last Friday when I was asked to comment on this statement—he said that he believed that Kim Il-song had made that statement to him. We said that we would wait for official confirmation. We received it today. That confirmation gives us the basis for resuming the talks. 
The President. I don't think it's useful for me to characterize it in that way. We know what the facts are. If you look at what we've done over the last year and a half, we have followed basically a two-pronged policy. We have worked as hard as we could to be firm, to be resolute, to bring our allies closer and closer together. And when I say our allies on this issue, I consider not just South Korea and Japan but Russia and China to be our allies. All of us have the same interests and the same desires. 
We also always kept the door open. I always said I did not seek a confrontation, I sought to give North Korea a way to become a part of the international community. 
When President Carter was invited and expressed a willingness to go to North Korea, I thought it gave us one opportunity that we would not otherwise have, with a private citizen, but a distinguished American private citizen, to communicate the position of our administration and to do it—the very fact that he went, I think, was a gesture of the importance that we placed on resolving this matter and not just for ourselves but for the world. 
And so I think that we know what the facts are. We know we pursued a firm course. We know that President Carter went and made a very persuasive case, and we know what the North Koreans did. I don't think it's useful to characterize this in terms of winners and losers. I think the world will be the winner if we can resolve this. But we've not done it yet. 
The President. Well, I don't know that I would characterize it in that way. He called me; we talked about it. I wanted to make sure he had adequate briefings. I have always—I have, as you probably know, I have—and I've said this I believe publicly—I have sought other means of personally communicating to Kim Ilsong that the desires of the United States and the interests of the United States and the policy of the United States was to pursue a nonnuclear Korean Peninsula and to give North Korea a way of moving with dignity into the international community and away from an isolated path, which we found quite disturbing for all the reasons that I've already said. 
It seemed to me that when President Carter expressed a willingness to go and they had given him an invitation of some longstanding to come, that that gave us the opportunity to give North Korea a direct message to their leader from a distinguished American citizen, without in any way undermining the necessary and correct government-to-government contacts that we had going on at other levels. 
President Carter, I think, was very faithful in articulating the policy of our Government. And I think that that provided a forum in which the North Korean leader, Kim Il-song, could respond as he did. And I'm very pleased about it. 
When we were called last Thursday and this whole issue was discussed and we said what we said about we hope that their message meant that they were willing to freeze their nuclear program, then they said they were. Then we got formal confirmation today of the definition of "freeze." Their definition was the same as ours. We had the basis to go forward. I'm very happy about it. 
The President. Well, that was a big part of the statement, of course, of the letter that we got, not just that there would be an agreement to freeze the program but that the agreement be verifiable. The IAEA inspectors and the monitoring equipment on the ground can be and will be used to verify the commitment not to reprocess and not to refuel. 
If we didn't have some way of verifying it, you and I wouldn't be having this conversation at this moment. 
The President. Well, I think, first of all, that is a decision for the peoples and their leaders in South and North Korea to resolve. What the United States wants is for the agreement that the Koreas made in 1991 to make the Peninsula nonnuclear to be carried through. 
The United States wants the NPT to be a success with regard to North Korea. The United States wants North Korea, in whatever relationship it pursues with South Korea—that is up to them—to move toward becoming an integral and responsible member of the international community. That will auger well for the peace and prosperity of the peoples of north Asia as well as for the security interest of the United States. That is what we have pursued with great diligence, and I'm very hopeful that these talks will bring us closer to that. 
As I said, this does not solve the problem, but it certainly gives us the basis for seeking a solution. And I'm quite pleased. 
The President. Oh, I have. I called him, talked to him about the letter. We had a very good talk, told him again I was glad he went, and I thought it was a trip worth taking, a risk worth taking, and I was very pleased. 

Remarks at the Democratic National Committee Dinner
June 22, 1994

I have two pieces of good news tonight. The first is that with about a half an hour left to go, the United States is ahead in the World Cup, 2 to nothing, over Colombia. I kind of like this World Cup. It reminds me of my campaign. We're the underdog in this deal; I like it. [Laughter] The second is far more important, and perhaps most of you have already heard, but this afternoon, the United States received official confirmation that North Korea is prepared to freeze its nuclear program in return for talking to us about those issues. This event, of course, is important to all of us, to our children, and if we're successful, even to our children's children. It does not solve our problems, but it gives us a chance to begin to solve them. It came about because of the steadfastness and resolve of our administration and working with our allies. In this case, we had an interesting set of allies from the very beginning, of course our friends in South Korea and Japan, but also in Russia and China. There was a sense that we had to do something here. 
It came about because of the deft putting of our case and the case for North Korea's coming into the community of nations by another great Democrat, former President Jimmy Carter. And tonight, I mentioned it not only because it is so important to all of us and to our future but because in addition to this being a party gala, it is an American celebration


Remarks at the Democratic National Committee Saxophone Club Reception
June 22, 1994

We had two pieces of good news already today; one's light, and one's not so light. The light one is that the United States won the soccer game tonight. I identify with our soccer team, you know, they start as underdogs in this deal. I like that. [Laughter] And they're doing well. And the thing that potentially and, I hope and pray, will ultimately affect your future in a very positive way is the formal notification I received this afternoon that the North Koreans are willing to suspend their nuclear program— [applause]. 


Remarks to Summer of Safety Program Participants in St. Louis
June 24, 1994

Let me tell you something, folks, all of us breathed a sigh of relief and had a genuine hope when I was able to announce that the North Koreans had agreed to suspend their nuclear program and talk to us about taking a different course into the future. And that was a wonderful thing. But when thousands of people are murdered on our streets every year, when thousands of our children are robbed of their future, a big part of our national security is what happens right here in St. Louis and on the streets of every community of this country. And Tim is helping to protect this Nation's security by participating in this program


Interview With Foreign Journalists
July 1, 1994
It is difficult, I think, to expect to have too high expectations for what has happened in the last several months because of all the political changes which have occurred within Japan. But I think we have continued to work along together. I think the important thing I would say—it's sort of like the argument I made to the gentleman from Canada. If you look at the relationship the United States and Japan—our troops are still there. Our military partnership is very strong. We worked as one to try to defuse the crisis in North Korea with regard to the North Korean nuclear program. I did everything I could to make sure that every step along the way, everything I did was coordinated closely with not just South Korea but also with Japan. Because of that and because—to get to the next question—our continuing strengthening relationship with Russia. We had good relationships with Russia during this period. We were able to reach out to the Chinese. But it worked because of the historic ties we have had.

The President. Well, it's not so easy to divide them, because of the obligations North Korea undertook in becoming a member of the Non-Proliferation Treaty regime, because that means that North Korea has to be open to inspection by the IAEA for all its facilities from the day that it became a member, forward. I mean, if you asked me, am I more concerned about whether North Korea has one or two nuclear weapons or the capacity to make them now or whether they might make two dozen in the future, that's an easy question to answer. I'm more concerned about two dozen than I am one or two. 
But in the—when you become a member of one of these international organizations and you assume the responsibilities of membership, then you have to honor those responsibilities. In terms of reunification and normalization of relations, all those things, those things will have to be worked out partly between the north and the south, and I am elated that they are going to meet. I think that's a good thing, the leaders of the two countries. 
But we will begin our discussions first on July 8th. And what we hope to do is to find ways to broaden this debate because really what this is about is, even more than the nuclear weapons, is what role will North Korea assume in the future? What is the vision of the leaders of North Korea for that nation at the turn of the century or 20 years from now? Should it be an isolated country that makes money from selling No Dong missiles and low-level nuclear materials? Or should it be a country that is in harmony with its neighbors and friends, using the industry and ability of its people to strengthen trade and commerce and the personal development of its people? 
To me that's an easy question to answer. If there is no threat to North Korea's security, if we mean them no ill, if Japan, if South Korea, if Russia, if China, if all of its neighbors wish to be partners in a more open world, and if the United States has that wish, then surely we should be able to work this problem out. That is my hope and my objective


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan in Naples, Italy
July 8, 1994

We began our talks with a discussion of North Korea and the fresh opportunity to resolve the situation that our common determination and diplomacy have produced. 
This is an important day. The third round of high-level talks is now beginning in Geneva. During those talks, North Korea has agreed to freeze verifiably the reprocessing and refueling elements of its nuclear program. Throughout this process, we have worked very closely with Japan and the Republic of Korea as well as with Russia and China.


The President's News Conference in Naples
July 8, 1994

Second, we are working against nuclear proliferation. In Geneva, the third round of talks between the United States and North Korea has just begun today. Here in Naples, at my first meeting with Japan's new Prime Minister, Mr. Murayama and I had a very good discussion about the North Korean situation, and the Prime Minister praised what he called the United States' "tenacious efforts" and pledged his continuous support in our nonproliferation efforts.


The President's Radio Address
July 9, 1994
In negotiations with North Korea that began yesterday in Geneva and in my first meeting here with Japan's new Prime Minister, we are addressing another challenge: the threat posed by nuclear proliferation and the need to limit the spread of weapons of mass destruction



Exchange With Reporters on North Korea in Naples, Italy
July 9, 1994

The President. Let me say, first of all, I have extended sincere condolences to the people of North Korea on behalf of the people of the United States after the death of Kim Il-song, and I have expressed my deep appreciation to him for his leadership in enabling our two countries to resume our talks. We hope the talks will resume as appropriate. We believe it is in the interest of both countries to continue. 
Obviously, the people there are preoccupied with their surprise and their grief at this moment. But we have no reason to believe that they will not continue at this time. 
The President. No. All we know is what was reported. And it was reported that he died of a heart ailment, and that's all we know. We believe, as I said—first of all, we believe that Kim Il-song's leadership in starting these talks again was a very good thing, and we believe it remains in the interest of both countries to continue them, and we hope they will as appropriate. 


The President's News Conference in Naples
July 9, 1994

The President. Well, I can tell you what we've learned today. We have learned today that, apparently, the North Koreans desire to continue on with the summit with South Korea and that, while they did ask that we suspend our talks with them, they asked that our representatives stay in Geneva. And we agreed to do that. So we believe that they will stay with their policy and stay with their course, that this reflects the feelings of the leadership in North Korea and not simply the feelings of Kim Il-song. 
Now, I'm only telling you what I know today, and all I know today is that they said they wanted us to suspend the talks. We understood that, but they asked that we remain in Geneva. And they communiqued to the South Koreans that they wish the summit to go forward. So I think that is a piece of good news. And that is the only news I have about it. 
The President. I don't know how to answer that. I know some things, obviously, about him. But I haven't met him. And one of the things that we're trying to do in North Korea, that I've tried to do from the beginning, is to open the prospect of a continuing and a personal dialog. I don't think we want to be isolated from each other. And as I said, the preliminary indications in what must be a very difficult time for them and a sad time have been encouraging. 
The President. First, let me reiterate: I can only tell you what I know. It is our understanding that the North Koreans have communicated their desire to continue with the summit, and they did ask our people to remain in Geneva. I do not know anything else, and I do not think I can really say anything else today. But I think you have to view those two signs as hopeful. 
The biggest problem we've had in the past, I think, is that, the sense of isolation and misunderstanding which can develop. So I am hoping that we'll be able to continue to talk, but I know only what I said. I can't comment on anything else yet. 
The President. It is my understanding that they want to have a funeral that has no foreign visitors and that is a personal thing for North Koreans only. That is our understanding. 
The President. If they were inviting foreign dignitaries to the funeral or receiving them I would certainly send someone there. 
The President. Well, I think it only—let me just go back to what I said. I think it only stands to reason that we would all be more concerned about the prospect of any country producing large numbers of nuclear weapons in the future which might be transferred to other countries. That's just a practical statement of fact. 
However, North Korea is a member of the NPT and has made commitments to a nonnuclear Peninsula, and because of its membership there and because of its commitments, we still care very much about what's happened since 1989. And what we hoped to do is to resolve these questions in these talks. And we think we can safely proceed with these talks with absolutely no downside to our allies in South Korea, to our friends in Japan, to the Chinese, to the Russians, to any others in the neighborhood, and to ourselves, as long as North Korea maintains its commitment to freeze the important elements of its nuclear program, the reprocessing and the refueling. And so we are proceeding ahead on both fronts, as I think it should. 
The President. We are engaging in the talks. One of the issues in the talks is what's happened to the fuel since 1989. That's the subject of the talks and part of the request for the inspections. What has been reported in the press, varying opinions of intelligence agencies, represents their best judgment, their—I don't want to use the word "guess," but there are differences of opinion based on best judgment. No one knows that for sure. That's what the talks are for, in part


The President's News Conference With President Boris Yeltsin of Russia in Naples
July 10, 1994

In the wake of the death of Kim Il-song, we also expressed our strong commitment to continuing talks with North Korea and our support for the holding of the summit which had previously been scheduled between leaders of North and South Korea. We also strongly agreed on the importance of pushing ahead with a resolution of the crisis in Bosnia.


The President's News Conference With Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany in Bonn
July 11, 1994

The President. First of all, let me say that the statement that I issued was brief, to the point, and appropriate, and very much in the interest of the United States. It is a fact that after years and years of isolation and a great deal of tension arising out of the nuclear questions, we began talks again with the North Koreans on the day that Kim Il-song died. 
I think it is in the interest of the United States that North Korea continue to suspend its reprocessing, refueling, and continue to engage in those talks. They have told us that the talks will resume after an appropriate time for grieving. And I would think that the veterans of the Korean war and their survivors, as much as any group of Americans, would very much want us to resolve this nuclear question with North Korea and to go forward. So what I said and what I did, I believed then and I believe now was in the interest of the United States and all Americans
The President. Well, the evidence will be in the action. That is, we have been told—first of all, let me break these two issues up. 
The United States said that we would go back to discussions on the nuclear questions if, but only if, the reprocessing and refueling were suspended so that the situation could not further deteriorate. The North Koreans have told us that they were prepared to continue the discussions, but they wanted an appropriate period of time in the aftermath of Kim Il-song's death. So I think, on balance, we know whether or not they will keep their word and we will be able to see that. We will know whether or not they continue to avoid reprocessing, refueling. And they say they want to continue the talks, so I'm hopeful on that. 
On the question of the summit, as I understand it—and I haven't had a chance to visit with President Kim about it, I'm going to talk with him in the next couple of days—keep in mind, that's a matter for the North Koreans and the South Koreans to determine between themselves. And I don't think it's entirely clear right now, at least, where both parties stand on the timing of that. I do hope it will be held as soon as it's appropriate and so do the G-7 countries. We, the G-8, yesterday, came out for that in our political statement. 
But there's no pie-in-the-sky optimism here; there are facts, which are the predicate to continuing talks. And the facts are, will the nuclear reprocessing and refueling be suspended and will the talks resume at an appropriate time and a reasonable time. And so far, the answers to both those questions seem to be yes, and therefore, I think that's good news
I don't know the younger Kim. And I think you have to be careful in judging people by what others say about them one way or the other. I think we need to proceed on the facts. If the facts are that North Korea is serious about continuing to talk with us in Geneva and will continue to suspend these important elements of the nuclear program, then we should proceed on that basis. Any other questions will have to be developed as we know more than we now know.



The President's News Conference With European Union Leaders in Berlin, Germany
July 12, 1994

President Clinton. Well, we are watching it very closely. We are concerned about what might happen, obviously. My position on that is the same that it has been from the very beginning, that that is a decision for them to make and their future is in their hands. 
But we believe it is in their interest and in our interest for them to continue to freeze the elements of their nuclear program and for us to resume the talks. We hope that is what they will do. In the meanwhile, we will monitor the facts in North Korea on the nuclear program. That is where we are. The next move basically is in their court. 
President Clinton. No, only the communications we've had in Switzerland with regard to the talks. And those so far have been satisfactory and not out of the ordinary. So we basically have no indication one way or the other at this moment. So what we need to do is to simply be vigilant, to simply—to look at the facts. And it's not useful to speculate, I think, certainly not in a naive way that would be excessively hopeful but also not in an unduly negative way. Let's just look at the facts and judge this situation based on the facts as they develop



Exchange With Reporters in Hot Springs, Arkansas
July 23, 1994

And things are going pretty well in the world. We've got our problems, to be sure, but we're working, trying to work to avoid a crisis in North Korea. We've got peace in the Middle East developing. The trip to Europe went very well. So I feel good about where we are in the world as we move toward the 21st century. And I feel very good about the fact that we're being able to change some things here at home and are being able to face some of our problems. So I feel good about it.


The President's News Conference
August 3, 1994
The President. I think I can do no better than to reiterate what I have always said, that North Korea's fate is still in its own hands; it must decide what it own future should be. I think at this time when North Korea has shown a willingness to stop reprocessing and to stop refueling, and when our talks are about to begin again next Friday, we should take the facts as we have them and keep working for progress. 
This is an issue which is very important to the long-term security of the United States. The question of a country that belongs to the nonproliferation regime deciding to become a nuclear power, the prospect that nuclear capacity could be transferred either by design or by accident to other countries or to rogue groups, this is a very serious thing for our long-term security. And we have spent a lot of time to make sure we are firm and deliberate; but that firmness, that deliberateness has led to these talks, which were interrupted when Kim Il-song passed away. We start the talks again on Friday. The agreement the North Koreans made is still holding about refueling and reprocessing. I think we should focus on that now and keep working for a satisfactory conclusion. 
The President. Yes, I am. I believe that. I have no reason to believe that we will not know if that agreement is violated.

Remarks to the 49th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 26, 1994

The United States will also advance a wideranging nonproliferation agenda, a global convention to halt production of fissile materials, efforts to curb North Korea's nuclear ambitions, transparent procedures for dismantling nuclear warheads, and our work to ban testing and extend the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty


The President's News Conference With President Boris Yeltsin of Russia
September 28, 1994

The most important talks and subjects of these talks are the strategic partnerships between Russia and the United States; international issues; external political coordination of our efforts so that we two great powers, two countries, constantly coordinated everything that we do so that nothing happens in the world that might ruin peace on our planet—we have to support peace; the Big-8; peacekeeping; CIS; the role of Russia in the CIS; NATO and Russia; coordination in the United Nations Security Council; reforming United Nations; cooperating in the United Nations and the CIS; the situation all around the world, Bosnia, Middle East, Caribbean Basin, North Korea, Rwanda, Islamic extremism, Iran, Libya, Iraq, Trans-Dniester, Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia, Tajikistan, the Baltics; military issues; START III—START I, START II, now III, START III now—we're talking about three—[laughter]—nonproliferation; harmonizing our—you're not catching up? You can't think fast enough? [Laughter] You can't think fast enough? Well, okay, then I'll go a little slower. All right? [Laughter] Apparently we're not on the same wavelength here, you and I, in terms of the pace here, okay


Interview With Alan Colmes
September 30, 1994
The President. Well, I think first of all, the President's first responsibility is to the security and safety of the American people. At the end of the cold war when our interests, our—excuse me, our security doesn't seem so imminently threatened by nuclear weapons, I still have to work hard on that. That's what I worked hard with President Yeltsin on; that's why we're so engaged in these very tough negotiations with the North Koreans



The President's News Conference
October 7, 1994
Secondly, with regard to Korea, I think that our actions in Korea and our policies to date have been appropriate. They have been firm; they have been deliberate. The implication of your remark was that they had a bomb-making operation going on during this administration. The evidence that has been cited in some press reports is quite different. It is that before I became President, they may have accumulated enough nuclear material to make a nuclear device or two. That has been the press reports. I fail to see how that shows a lack of resolve on our part since we have been here. I think we have pursued this course quite firmly. We were pushing the sanctions option if there was not a return to serious negotiations. There has been, and I hope those negotiations will succeed.



Remarks on the Nuclear Agreement With North Korea
October 18, 1994

Good afternoon. I am pleased that the United States and North Korea yesterday reached agreement on the text of a framework document on North Korea's nuclear program. This agreement will help to achieve a longstanding and vital American objective: an end to the threat of nuclear proliferation on the Korean Peninsula. 
This agreement is good for the United States, good for our allies, and good for the safety of the entire world. It reduces the danger of the threat of nuclear spreading in the region. It's a crucial step toward drawing North Korea into the global community. 
I want to begin by thanking Secretary Christopher and our chief negotiator, Ambassador at Large Bob Gallucci, for seeing these negotiations through. I asked Bob if he'd had any sleep, since he's going to answer all your technical questions about this agreement, and he said that he had had some sleep. So be somewhat gentle with him. After meeting with my chief national security advisers, and at their unanimous recommendation, I am instructing Ambassador Gallucci to return to Geneva on Friday for the purpose of signing an agreement. 
The United States has been concerned about the possibility that North Korea was developing nuclear weapons since the 1980's. Three administrations have tried to bring this nuclear program under international control. There is nothing more important to our security and to the world's stability than preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles. And the United States has an unshakeable commitment to protect our ally and our fellow democracy South Korea. Thirty-eight thousand American troops stationed on the Peninsula are the guarantors of that commitment. 
Today, after 16 months of intense and difficult negotiations with North Korea, we have completed an agreement that will make the United States, the Korean Peninsula, and the world safer. Under the agreement, North Korea has agreed to freeze its existing nuclear program and to accept international inspection of all existing facilities. 
This agreement represents the first step on the road to a nuclear-free Korean Peninsula. It does not rely on trust. Compliance will be certified by the International Atomic Energy Agency. The United States and North Korea have also agreed to ease trade restrictions and to move toward establishing liaison offices in each other's capitals. These offices will ease North Korea's isolation. 
From the start of the negotiations, we have consulted closely with South Korea, with Japan, and with other interested parties. We will continue to work closely with our allies and with the Congress as our relationship with North Korea develops. 
Throughout this administration, the fight against the spread of nuclear weapons has been among our most important international priorities, and we've made great progress toward removing nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and from Belarus. Nuclear weapons in Russia are no longer targeted on our citizens. Today all Americans should know that as a result of this achievement on Korea, our Nation will be safer and the future of our people more secure


Remarks to the Governor's Leadership Conference in New York City
October 19, 1994

We also clearly are working to make the world a safe and a more democratic and a freer place. For the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age, Russian missiles are no longer pointed at the United States. We have played a major role in trying to promote peace in Northern Ireland, in the Middle East, and of course, in Haiti. We have secured an agreement with North Korea to end that nation's nuclear program, which is terribly important. And we have told Iraq that we still believe the territorial integrity of its neighbors are inviolate and that it must not be enabled to intimidate the United Nations.


Interview With Marjorie Clapprood of WRKO Radio, Boston, Massachusetts
October 19, 1994

The President. Well, I hope so. I think, first of all, a lot of these problems are very difficult, and they don't yield overnight. And a lot of them are things we have been working on here for 2 years. But I'm very proud of what our people, particularly our young men and women in uniform, have done in Haiti and in the Persian Gulf. I'm proud of the role the United States is playing toward peace in the Middle East and in Northern Ireland. And I'm very proud of the work that Ambassador Gallucci did in hammering out this agreement with the North Koreans, which will enable us to avoid a confrontation with them, and enable them to move toward a more normal relationship with South Korea and with the rest of the world, and take a major nuclear threat away


The President's News Conference
October 21, 1994
Before I take your questions, I'd like to say just a word about the framework with North Korea that Ambassador Gallucci signed this morning. This is a good deal for the United States. North Korea will freeze and then dismantle its nuclear program. South Korea and our other allies will be better protected. The entire world will be safer as we slow the spread of nuclear weapons. 
South Korea, with support from Japan and other nations, will bear most of the cost of providing North Korea with fuel to make up for the nuclear energy it is losing. And they will pay for an alternative power system for North Korea that will allow them to produce electricity while making it much harder for them to produce nuclear weapons. 
The United States and international inspectors will carefully monitor North Korea to make sure it keeps its commitments. Only as it does so will North Korea fully join the community of nations
The President. I don't think it does deny them special inspections. It commits North Korea first to freeze and then to dismantle, something they'd never committed to do before and something they weren't required to do under the NPT. It also commits them to ship out their spent nuclear fuel, to get it physically out of the country so they cannot do anything with it. The question of special inspections, whether and when, is put off from the present, and that bothers some people. But if you consider the fact that the waste sites are not going anywhere, that the IAEA is going to be in the country, and that we have a commitment for a freeze and then a dismantling and that if they ever violate it they won't get the benefits that they seek from it, it seems to me this is still a very good deal indeed. And I think that what we have to do is to work with the IAEA people who will be on the ground and work out the practical details of this.



Remarks at a Rally for Democratic Candidates in Seattle, Washington
October 23, 1994

I wanted to make a world more peaceful and prosperous. That's what all these trade expansions are all about. That's what's selling all this high-tech material and products and the airplanes and the apples—that's what it's all about, letting people prosper in a global economy. I wanted you to be safer. And that's why I'm so proud of the fact that these little children are the first generation of Americans since the dawn of nuclear power that do not have Russian missiles pointing at them. I am proud of that, glad they will not have to worry about a North Korean nuclear power threatening their future, glad the Chinese have agreed not to sell their dangerous missiles.


Remarks at a Rally for Democratic Candidates in Cleveland, Ohio
November 1, 1994

And who could fail to be pleased that for the first time since we had nuclear weapons in two countries there are no longer any Russian missiles pointed at our children tonight? There are the elements in place of an agreement that will keep North Korea from becoming a nuclear power. We've been on the side of peace and freedom everyplace from the Persian Gulf to the Middle East to Northern Ireland to southern Africa to Haiti. This world is for Americans a more prosperous and a safer place than it was 2 years ago



Interview With John Crane and Ann Nyberg of WTNH Television, New Haven, Connecticut
November 2, 1994

But the benefits that are coming in foreign policy, the nuclear agreement with North Korea, the work in the Middle East, the success in Haiti, they are the result of 2 years of hard work that happened to coalesce at this time. There was no politics in that, and there shouldn't be.


Remarks at a Rally for Democratic Candidates in Providence, Rhode Island
November 2, 1994

And the world is changing. The world is changing. There is more trade but a lower threat of nuclear problems. We continue to work with the Russians. We have made an agreement with the North Koreans not to become a nuclear state. We are expanding trade and job opportunities all around the world. We are promoting peace in a peaceful but strong manner from Haiti to Northern Ireland to the Middle East to the Persian Gulf



