MID 61102, US v USSR, 27 dec 1963 to 26-Jan-64 to 18-Apr-65



131 - Radio and Television Remarks on the Reopening of the Geneva Disarmament Conference.
January 21, 1964

THIS MORNING in Geneva, Switzerland, the 18-nation Committee on Disarmament resumed its work. There is only one item on the agenda today of that conference. It is the leading item on the agenda of all mankind, and that one item is peace. 
In my message to Geneva today, I expressed pride in the gains that we have made and I prayed that the tide was turned, that further and more far-reaching agreements lie ahead of us and that future generations will mark 1964 as the year that the world turned, for all time, away from the horrors of war and constructed new bulwarks of peace. 
Agreement on the control and the reduction and the ultimate abolition of weapons and war is not impossible as it seemed for so many years. We now have a limited nuclear test ban treaty. We now have an emergency communications link, a "hot line" between Washington and Moscow. We now have an agreement in the United Nations to keep bombs out of outer space. 
These are all small steps, but they go in the right direction, the direction of security and sanity and peace. Now we must go further. lust as we are determined to do whatevermust be done to defend our freedom and to deter aggression, so must we be equally determined to reduce the risks of another worldwide war, a war in which the first hour might be measured in terms of how many hundreds of millions are killed. 
If we have the genius to create these terrible weapons of destruction, then, certainly, we have the genius to create the means of their destruction. There will be risks, there will be doubts and delays and frustrations and disappointments, but the pursuit of peace must continue. Today we return to the conference table at Geneva with a new momentum and a new hope based on continuing discussions with our allies and effective safeguards, the United States asking the world to take further steps towards peace, enforceable steps which can endanger no one's safety and will enlarge everyone's security. 
First, we are proposing new agreements to stop the spread of nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing them. Today's uncertain and unsatisfactory balance of terror will be all terror and no balance if dozens of nations, large and small, have their own nuclear trigger. 
Second, we are proposing that both sides accept observation posts on their own territories as a safeguard against miscalculation and misunderstanding and the fear of surprise attack. 
And, third, we are proposing that both sides stop all production of the fissionable material that is used in nuclear weapons. This country and the Soviet Union already have produced enough explosive force to equal 10 tons of TNT for every man, woman, and child on the face of this earth. We have already announced that we are cutting back our production in the United States. We in the United States are willing to shut down more plants if and when the Soviet Union does the same, plant by plant, with inspection on both sides. 
And, fourth, as stated in my letter to Chairman Khrushchev yesterday, we are proposing practical measures to ban the threat or the use of force, direct or indirect force, to change boundaries, demarcation lines, the control of territory, or access to it. In short, we are going beyond Mr. Khrushchev's New Year's declaration against the use of force in territorial disputes and we are asking him to join us in applying that principle on a much broader basis. 
And, fifth, finally, we are proposing that a way be found to stop the ominous increase in strategic nuclear forces. To this end, let both sides explore freezing the numbers and freezing the kinds of strategic nuclear vehicles, whether planes or missiles, whether they are offensive weapons or defensive weapons. 
Each one of these five proposals is important to peace. No one of them is impossible of agreement. The best way to begin disarming is to begin. And we shall hear any plan, go any place, make any plea, and play any part that offers a realistic prospect for peace. 
Disarmament is not merely the Government's business. It is your business. It is everyone's business. It is the concern, or should be, of every parent and teacher, every public servant, and every private citizen. 
So I ask your support for these measures. I ask your prayers for peace. This world has had its fill of war. We want a just and lasting peace and with your help and with God's help we shall achieve it.



141 - Remarks at the Dedication of the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of History and Technology.
January 22, 1964

I hope that every schoolchild who visits this Capital, every foreign visitor who comes to this First City, and every doubter who hesitates before the onrush of tomorrow will, some way, spend some time in this great museum. In truth, this new museum could become an open window through which could look the children of Asia and Western Europe and South America and the Soviet Union


139 - Remarks to New Participants in "Plans for Progress" Equal Opportunity Agreements.
January 22, 19

I believe the individual reward that comes to each of those elements is such as to provide the incentive that will neverpermit any other philosophy to overtake us. I think that is the real reason or justification we had for selling wheat to the Russians. We had it rotting in our barns and the rats were eating it. We had all that our stomachs would hold and all we could store, and we did it with a third of the acres that they have

That is all I have to say to you, except, again, to thank you and tell you that Russia has more land than we have, more people than we have, and more resources than we have, but she doesn't have the system we have. Now let's perfect this system of ours and let's make it a model for all the world. Let's make it a pride and joy




150 - The President's News Conference
January 25, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We are hoping, praying, and working very hard to find some solutions to all of our differences. Our viewpoint is that we are consistent in our position. Our general position is that we want to do anything that responsible men of conviction and good will can do to preserve peace. Mr. Foster spent some hours with me before he left.10 We thought we put forth an affirmative program and we welcome anyone who wants to join us




170 - The President's News Conference
February 1, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not express it in terms of optimism or pessimism. I would rather say that it should be the goal of every leader in the world today to try to find areas of agreement that will lead to disarmament. We are seriously, dedicatedly, doing our very best and trying to initiate and develop every conceivable fresh proposal we can that will lead to that end



175 - Remarks in New York City at the Dinner of the Weizmann Institute of Science.
February 6, 1964

If we put high emphasis on each step toward peace, no matter how feeble the gait or how short the stride, it is because I think we understand the nature of this new and changed world, a world where in only a matter of moments we could destroy 100 million people in the Soviet Union, and they could destroy 100 million people in Europe, and they could destroy 100 million people here in the United States



182 - Remarks to Key Officials of the Internal Revenue Service.
February 11, 1964

We know that Mr. Khrushchev can kill a hundred million people in Western Europe in a matter of minutes. And he can kill a hundred million people more or less in this country in a matter of minutes. And we can kill a hundred million people in Russia, in the Soviet Union, in a matter of minutes. That is not great statesmanship. What we have got to do is be prepared to defend ourselves, but also be prepared to find a solution to these many problems



199 - Remarks at Miami Beach at a Democratic Party Dinner.
February 27, 1964

These great weapons we have produced, we hope we will never have to use. for arms alone will never bring us peace. We will continue to explore every opportunity which might lead to a reduction of tensions, to a lessening of hostilities, to a decrease in armaments. This exploration has already borne fruit in an agreed end to atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons and the establishment of instant communication between Washington and Moscow. 
We have many basic differences with the Soviet Union. But we also believe and work on the assumption that the Russian people desire a better life for their children. Reducing the danger of a nuclear holocaust is as necessary to their national interest as it is to ours



201 - The President's News Conference
February 29, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I know of no good purpose that would be served by speculating on the military strategy of the forces of the South Vietnamese. I think that too much speculation has already taken place--I think that a good deal of it without justification. I sometimes wonder if General Eisenhower, before the battle of Normandy, had been confronted with all the--if the world had all the information concerning his plans that they seem to have concerning ours in Viet-Nam, what would have happened on that fateful day. 
So, I would answer your question merely by saying that I do not care to speculate on what might happen. The plans that have been discussed in the papers are not plans that have come to my attention, or that I have approved



211 - The President's News Conference
March 7, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We would be very happy to explore that possibility with them. We have already concluded a wheat sale to them, and if they need additional wheat or anything else we have, we would be glad to discuss it with the appropriate officials at the appropriate time. I know of few things that the Soviet Union has that we are in need of, but it is a matter that we would be glad to pursue

THE PRESIDENT. As expressed before, in the question asked by Mrs. Thomas,8 I think that we will be glad to explore any suggestions made to us, and if there is anything that we have that other people need, we will give consideration to selling it. If there is anything that they have that we need to buy, we would explore the desirability of doing so

THE PRESIDENT. I think that we are in adequate communication with each other. I would be very happy to see the Chairman when it is indicated that there are any things that we can explore that would be helpful. I know of no reason for such a meeting at this time. 
THE PRESIDENT. The answer is "No" to both of your questions


218 - Transcript of Television and Radio Interview Conducted by Representatives of Major Broadcast Services.
March 15, 1964

I am so happy to be a part of a system where the average per capita income is in excess of $200 per month, when there are only six nations in the entire world that have as much as $80 per month. And while the Soviet Union has three times as many tillable acres of land as we have and a population that's in excess of ours and a great many resources that we don't have that if properly developed would exceed our potential in water and oil and so forth, nevertheless we have one thing they don't have, and that is our system of private enterprise, free enterprise, where the employer, hoping to make a little profit, the laborer hoping to justify his wages, can get together and make a better mousetrap



232 - The President's News Conference
March 21, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I don't think I have any comment on that. Talk to the Department about that



242 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
March 28, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We are very pleased that we were able to effect a prompt release. We don't agree with their statement that they were involved in any spying mission. We are happy that we were able to accomplish their release. We continually seek good relations with Russia and other countries, and we do all we can to ease the tensions that exist. We are happy that in this instance we were able to work it out promptly



246 - The President's News Conference
April 4, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. They obviously have problems in all of the countries of the world, and they are fighting for support among the Communist parties in those countries. That is a matter that concerns them and I do not see that there is anything I could say that would contribute to it



250 - Remarks to New Participants in "Plans for Progress" Equal Opportunity Agreements.
April 9, 1964

Russia has more people than we have. She has many more resources in many more categories than we have. She has 600 million arable acres of land, compared to our 187 million. She has 225 million population compared to our 190 million population. 
But the one thing she does not have is the imagination, the ingenuity, and the initiative that comes with the free enterprise system, where a capitalist is willing to invest his dollar in the hope that he will get a small return back on it and where the manager is willing to get up at daylight and work until midnight and develop stomach ulcers in order to get a better mousetrap at a cheaper price; where the employee will almost willingly get in a trot because he has pride in the product that his sweat produces. 
Those three elements of our national society--the capitalist, the manager, and the worker put together--can outproduce and outdevelop and outsurvive any slave state where that incentive is not there and where that profit motive is gone



256 - The President's News Conference
April 11, 1964

The world record for aircraft speed, currently held by the Soviets, has been repeatedly broken in secrecy by the United States aircraft A-11. The President has instructed the Department of Defense to demonstrate this capability with the procedure which, according to international rules, will permit the result of the test to be entered as a new world record. The Soviet record is 1,665 miles an hour. The A-11 had already flown in excess of 2,000 miles an hour

THE PRESIDENT. They are moving out. They have fewer troops there than they had months ago. There are still some troops there, but the number has declined substantially. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I don't want to get in any numbers game because I don't think, first of all, that anyone really knows--can speak with cool authority in that field. But our judgment is that they have moved troops out


266 - The President's News Conference
April 16, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. No, I do not anticipate another major development at this time. I am encouraged by the fact that there are approaches being made to purchase some things from our country, and the foreign Relations Committee of the Senate is now having hearings and giving study to the possibilities of increasing East-West trade. But so far as anticipating just the extent of that trade and in what lines it will be, I am not able to say

For that expenditure of $25 billion we have achieved extra combat divisions, extra nuclear warheads, extra missile strength. I am pleased with those accomplishments. 
Under the law the Secretary of Defense, Mr. McNamara, is charged with the leadership and the direction of the Defense Department. While he operates a tight budget, I think he operates an adequate one. I think his work has been constructive. I have confidence in him. The Congress has confidence in him. I believe the American people have confidence in him. You can depend on what he tells you



271 - The President's News Conference
April 18, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to add anything to the statement that we made yesterday.6 It was a work meeting. We discussed thoroughly and comprehensively a good many of the problems that face our two nations. I think communication between us is important. I hope it will be helpful. I always want to maintain accessibility with everyone, including the press

My statement on Monday will be a very general statement of our foreign policy.1 I will be talking especially about our relations with the Soviet Union and about certain other important areas, like Cuba and China. I will talk about the responsibility of the candidates, and issues of war and peace, and policies toward Asia, especially Viet-Nam; the policy towards Latin America



272 - Remarks on Foreign Affairs at the Associated Press Luncheon in New York City.
April 20, 1964

First, is our relationship with the Soviet Union, the center of our concern for peace. Communists, using force and intrigue, seek to bring about a Communist-dominated world. Our convictions, our interests, our life as a nation, demand that we resolutely oppose, with all of our might, that effort to dominate the world. This, and this alone, is the cause of the cold war between us. 
For the United States has nothing to fear from peaceful competition. We welcome it and we will win it. It is our system which flourishes and grows stronger in a world free from the threat of war. And in such a competition all people, everywhere, will be the gainers. 
Today, as we meet here, there are new pressures, new realities, which make it permissible to hope that the pursuit of peace is in the interests of the Soviet Union as it is in ours. And our own restraint may be convincing the Soviet leaders of the reality that we, in America, seek neither war nor the destruction of the Soviet Union. 
Thus I am very hopeful that we can take important steps toward the day when, in the words of the Old Testament, "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war anymore." 
We must remember that peace will not come suddenly. It will not emerge dramatically from a single agreement or a single meeting. It will be advanced by concrete and limited accommodations, by the gradual growth of common interests, by the increased awareness of shifting dangers and alignments, and by the development of trust in a good faith based on a reasoned view of the world. 
Our own position is clear. We will discuss any problem, we will listen to any proposal, we will pursue any agreement, we will take any action which might lessen the chance of war without sacrificing the interests of our allies or our own ability to defend the alliance against attack. In other words, our guard is up, but our hand is out



285 - The President's News Conference
April 23, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to go into a discussion of the private correspondence that I have had with the Chairman. 
We reached the decision here in the United States on our own initiative as what we, in the United States, ought to do. We did it in a prudent and reasonable concern for our strength and for avoiding excess, and we then explained our intention to the United Kingdom and to the Soviet Government. They, in turn, acting on their own responsibility, announced parallel decisions

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I wouldn't want to organize any peace parley here this morning. I think that it is very important that we try to understand the other peoples of the world, and that we all recognize that it is hari-kari to think of another war; that we have got to constantly keep our guard up and our hand out. 
What we are trying to do is to explore every possibility that we can conceive of that will lead to better understanding. We are trying to be tolerant and recognize the problems of other leaders and of other nations, just as we hope they realize ours. 
We have no illusions that we can settle all the problems that exist and have all the world live in happiness tomorrow. But we are ambitious, we do have a goal, we are optimistic, or this would be a very dreary job. 
In the 5 months that I have been in it, I have tried to accord other peoples the same consideration I would like to have for myself and, generally speaking, I have found that the world is anxious to pursue the same objective that I am. I don't know that we will have an answer tomorrow, but I do confidently believe that the tensions had been eased under the leadership of President Kennedy, and that the strength that we have developed has contributed to taking us away from war. 
If we keep a cool head, our feet on the ground, use some imagination and ingenuity, respect others, we can find the answer as we have in some of our smaller problems.
THE PRESIDENT. I said at one of my conferences that from the high point that strength had been reduced considerably. They still have some people there. I would not calculate the exact number because I don't want to get into the numbers game, and I don't think we can do it with any accuracy. I think our people know in general terms what a good estimate is, and we know that there have been substantial reductions in the past, but we know they still have a number of people there




287 - Remarks in Chicago at a Fundraising Dinner of the Democratic Club of Cook County.
April 23, 1964

This week we took a specific step in that direction when we decided to reduce the production of fissionable material for atomic bombs. With that decision, we and the Soviet Union took one step back from the precipice. 
We will continue to search for new ways to build the common interest while, you may be sure, always preserving the national interest. We are going to go as far as is prudent and as fast as is possible to bring peace to this troubled world



316 - The President's News Conference Held on the South Lawn at the White House
May 6, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I am not familiar with any such agreement that we have with the Russian people
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I had an informal discussion with a German newspaperman, in company with a friend.6 In the course of that conversation I expressed to him the determination of the American people to avoid war, if at all possible, that we wanted to find a road to peace and we would do everything we could in that direction. I told him that I thought the best way to do that was to follow the Golden Rule, to do unto others as you would have them do unto you, and to try to find ways and means of finding areas of agreement




359 - Remarks in Lexington at the Dedication of the George C. Marshall Research Library.
May 23, 1964

But that vision did not stop where Soviet conquest began. To General Marshall, permanent peace depended upon rebuilding all European civilization within its historic boundaries. 
The Iron Curtain rang down upon that hope. But the correctness of his conviction has not changed. 
Today we work to carry on the vision of the Marshall plan. First, to strengthen the ability of every European people to select and shape its own society. Second, to bring every European nation closer to its neighbors in the relationships of peace




379 - The President's News Conference
June 2, 1964

Because of the improvements in our balance of payments, as well as the result of heavy Russian sales of gold for the year to date, Secretary Dillon informs me this morning that our overall gold stock has increased by $97 million through May. 
I think it is important that you preface that with this statement: 
"Because of the improvement in our balance of payments, as well as the result of heavy Russian sales of gold, for the year to date our overall gold stock has increased by $97 million."
THE PRESIDENT. I haven't discussed his conversation with the Senator and I would like to do that before I make any detailed comments on what he was alleged or reported to have said. 
I find that you can't always depend on reports that you get in the press. That is my own personal experience. But I will say this: that we, at the time of the Cuban missile crisis, attempted to work out an agreement for inspection, and that was refused. This Nation, in order to protect its people, must have a knowledge of what is taking place, and we propose to keep informed. As to what offers the best method, we will have to determine that



382 - Commencement Address in New London at the United States Coast Guard Academy.
June 3, 1964

In the past 3 years we have increased our nuclear power on alert 2? times, and our nuclear superiority will continue to grow until we reach agreement on arms control. 
We have now more than 1,000 fully armed ICBM's and Polaris missiles ready for retaliation. The Soviet Union has far fewer, and none ready to be launched beneath the seas. We have more than 1,100 strategic bombers, many of which are equipped with air-to-surface and decoy missiles to help them reach almost any target. The Soviet Union, we estimate, could with difficulty send less than one-third of this number over targets in the United States. 
Against such force the combined destructive power of every battle ever fought by man is like a firecracker thrown against the sun
Thus, in the past 3 years, as our strength rose--and, in large part, as a consequence of that rising strength--we have been able to take more tangible steps toward peace than at any time since the cold war began. We established an Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. We agreed with the Soviet Union on a statement of disarmament principles. We signed a test ban treaty. We established the "hot line." We supported a U.N. resolution prohibiting the orbiting of nuclear weapons. We cut back on nuclear production while the Soviet Union did the same. And we have just completed the negotiation of a new consular agreement. 
And, as the Geneva conference reconvenes, we have before it a series of proposals that I submitted, designed to freeze strategic nuclear delivery systems, to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and to prohibit the use of force to solve disputes. And we will welcome any other proposal by any nation which promises realistic progress toward peace



413 - Remarks in San Francisco at a Democratic Fundraising Dinner.
June 19, 1964

Well, in 1961 we became the first nation to establish a disarmament agency in the world. And we have negotiated a limited nuclear test ban. We have established a "hot line" between Washington and Moscow, and, along with the Russians, we have cut back the production of materials used to make nuclear weapons. With each step the world has inched back from a nuclear precipice. 
Through most of the years since World War II, America has been engaged in preventing conquests by communism. In the last few years the tide has turned. Tonight we are on the offensive in the pursuit of peace. We still face deadly dangers. We still face determined adversaries. But tonight we have the confidence in our strength and leadership which makes it possible for us to seek agreement without fearing the loss of our liberty. Unless our adversaries rashly mistake our intentions I predict that we will move closer to enduring peace in the coming decade than at any other time since the guns of August shattered the serenity of the earth half a century ago




420 - The President's News Conference
June 23, 1964

I am happy to announce that the United States and the Soviet Union have agreed to explore the possibility of scientific cooperation on methods of desalting sea water,1 including the possible use of nuclear power. As an initial step, the meeting of U.S. and Soviet representatives will be held in Washington on July 14 and 15 of this year. 
The purpose of the initial meeting will be, first, to discuss the general problem of desalting; two, to review the present activities and plans of the two countries in this area; three, to consider possible areas of cooperation. The representatives will then advise their respective governments as to the best way to proceed. 
I hope that this meeting will lead to effective scientific cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union, in what could become a very important activity of great economic significance to many areas of the world



435 - Remarks at the Annual Swedish Day Picnic, Minnehaha Park, Minneapolis.
June 28, 1964

In this way we have signed a treaty already ending nuclear tests in the atmosphere. Already we have cut back our production of atomic fuel and weapons. Already we have established a "hot-line" between Washington and Moscow. Already we are meeting with the Soviets to pool our efforts in making fresh water from the oceans. 
These agreements, by themselves, have not ended tensions or they have not ended war. But because of them we have moved much closer to peace



475 - The President's News Conference
July 24, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I think I have already done that. I pointed out that we had already had one conference, and that we would carry out the agreements reached at that conference table, that there would be no need of our presence there, but until there is demonstrated upon the part of those who are ignoring the agreements reached at the conference table, some desire to carry out their agreement, we expect to continue our efforts in Viet-Nam



504 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 8, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I would not care to go even so far as Mr. McNamara in speculating on what other people are going to do. That involves a great many imponderables, and I don't see any useful purpose being gained by speculation



531 - Remarks at a Reception for Small Businessmen.
August 20, 1964

But whether we are Democrats or Republicans, we all believe in this system. We are all Americans first. And we know that in this world in which we live and all of its uncertainties and the pitfalls that we may face tomorrow--as Secretary Rusk described those days when we sat across that table with Russian missiles 90 miles from our shores ready to be launched, I thought of the agonizing evaluations that we had to make, and that last day when we left our house not knowing whether we would come back that night or not. 
So as we meet here in this beautiful city on the banks of the Potomac, in this Capital of the free world, we realize that there are two philosophies at each other's jugular in the world. 
The Russian people have a desire for peace, in my judgment; but they have a different philosophy from ours. They have more people. They have more land. They have more acreage. They have more of many resources than we have
And if we are not to be buried, if we are to survive, it's going to be not because of the number of our people or the wealth of our resources or the measurement of our acres. It's going to be because we have a better system of government--the free enterprise system. A system where a man can take his dollar and invest it with the hope of getting back a small additional return; where the manager will get up at daylight and work 'til midnight and develop stomach ulcers trying to avoid a strike and to get the most out of those men and match that management and men and money to produce a better mousetrap at a smaller cost; where the worker is worthy of his hire and is not so concerned about his retirement or his social security at the moment as he is about doing a good day's work and producing what needs to be produced in order to compete with his neighbor. 
And those three working together--the capitalist, the manager, the worker--I believe can produce more, faster, cheaper than any commissar or any slave labor in all the world



533 - Remarks at the Convocation of the National War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces.
August 21, 1964

Military and diplomatic policies and performances are being influenced and are being dominated by policies and performances at the center of the political systems. This is true for free Europe and Eastern Europe. This is true for Soviet Russia. This is true for Communist China. This is clearly and conspicuous true for the United States



545 - Filmed Message to Delegates of the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
August 30, 1964

Our Government is proceeding with an aggressive program of nuclear desalting. What we learn in this program will be shared with other nations. Already we have begun cooperative exchanges with Mexico, with Israel, and with the Soviet Union



562 - Remarks in Cadillac Square, Detroit.
September 7, 1964

Modern weapons are not like any other. In the first nuclear exchange, 100 million Americans and more than 100 million Russians would all be dead. And when it was over, our great cities would be in ashes, our fields would be barren, our industry would be destroyed, and our American dreams would have vanished. 
As long as I am President I will bend every effort to make sure that that day never comes. I am not the first President to speak here in Cadillac Square, and I do not intend to be the last. 
Make no mistake. There is no such thing as a conventional nuclear weapon. 
For 19 peril-filled years no nation has loosed the atom against another. To do so now is a political decision of the highest order. And it would lead us down an uncertain path of blows and counterblows whose outcome none may know. No President of the United States of America can divest himself of the responsibility for such a decision. 
Any man who shares control of such enormous power must remember that "He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit is better than he that taketh a city




577 - Remarks in Seattle on the Control of Nuclear Weapons.
September 16, 1964

It means, I think, that we have a unique responsibility, unique in history, for the defense of freedom. Our nuclear power alone has deterred Soviet aggression. Under the shadow of our strength, our friends have kept their freedom and have built their nations. 
It means that we can no longer wait for the tides of conflict to touch our shores. 
It means that great powers can never again delude themselves into thinking that war will be painless or that victory will be easy. Thus, atomic power creates urgent pressure for peaceful settlements, and for the strengthening of the United Nations. 
It means a change must come in the life of nations. Man has fought since time began, and now it has become clear that the consequences of conflict are greater than any gain, and man just simply must change if man is to survive



579 - Remarks in Sacramento on the Steps of the State Capitol.
September 17, 1964

But the condition of our strength is never static. As dangers change, our strength must change, and we are matching new dangers with sure reply. 
Seven years ago America awakened one morning to find a Soviet satellite orbiting the skies. We found that our adversaries had acquired new capabilities for the use, or the misuse, of space. 
This administration moved to meet that challenge. We sought and we supported a resolution unanimously approved in the United Nations banning the use of weapons of mass destruction in outer space. We have stated that we have no intention of putting warheads into orbit. We have no reason to believe that any nation now plans to put nuclear warheads into orbit. We have more effective systems today. 
At the same time, we recognize the danger that an aggressor might some day use armed satellites to try to terrorize the entire population of the world, and we have acted to meet that threat. To insure that no nation will be tempted to use the reaches of space as a platform for weapons of mass destruction, we began in 1962 and 1963 to develop systems capable of destroying bomb-carrying satellites. 
We have now developed and tested two systems with the ability to intercept and destroy armed satellites circling the earth in space. I can tell you today that these systems are in place, that these systems are operationally ready, that these systems are on alert to protect this Nation and to protect the free world. 
Our only purpose still is peace, but should another nation employ such weapons in space, the United States will be prepared and will be ready to reply. But this is not the only new development. We are constantly seeking means of protecting this Nation and our allies. 



589 - Remarks in Atlantic City at the Convention of the United Steelworkers of America.
September 22, 1964

If freedom in the world survives, it will be because of the quality of our system. If we permit numbers alone to determine whether freedom or communism prevails, the Communists have more people in the Soviet Union than we have free people in the United States. Their resources are many and are extensive. 
But we are relying on our system because the capitalist who can invest his dollar and hope to get back a fair return without it being confiscated, the manager who gets up early and works late to plan that machinery and those men, and working together, hoping some day that he will get a bonus or a profit-sharing plan, the worker who has maximum wages and minimum hours, and other benefits, realizing he has the highest standard of living of any worker in the world--all three of those make up the American system of free enterprise. And don't tell me that they can't produce more, faster, cheaper than any commissar anywhere can direct



596 - Remarks in El Paso at a Ceremony Marking the Settlement of the Chamizal Dispute.
September 25, 1964

The Soviet Union is increasingly absorbed in the disappointments of its economy and disputes with former comrades. Our strength is convincing them that they actually have nothing to gain by war. Increased willingness to reach agreement has brought the test ban treaty in which so many peace-loving nations like your own have joined, one of many first steps toward the day when really the fear of war can finally be banished from this earth



604 - Remarks in Hartford to a Group of Business Leaders.
September 28, 1964

Now these two philosophies are in a struggle. They are after each other's jugular, and if we survive it will not be because we have more people than they have, because they outpopulate us. There are many more millions in the Soviet Union than we have in the United States. They have more than 600 million acres of tillable land and we have less than 200 million, so they have a lot more tillable soil. They outnumber us in many of our greatest resources and their potential in other ways far exceeds ours. 
So in resources, in human beings, in tillable acres, we are all at a disadvantage. What do we rely on? We rely on the one great advantage that the American people have: that is our system of government



619 - The President's News Conference
October 3, 1964

I am convinced, as I said in Seattle, that the spread of nuclear weapons is one of the great dangers to peace, and as long as I am President, I shall continue to work as hard as I know how to work to seek agreements that will stop that spread. 
Unfortunately, as you know, and as the public record clearly shows, the Soviet Union so far has refused to support our proposal and, as all the world knows, the Chinese Communists have violently opposed any nuclear agreement of any kind




631 - Remarks in Raleigh at North Carolina State College.
October 6, 1964

We talked about the awesome responsibilities in this era of nuclear power. 
We reflected over the confrontation that our Nation had with the Soviet Union just a few months before in the Cuba missile crisis. 
We realized that by one impulsive act you could press a button and wipe out the lives of 300 million people before the sun went down, and once done, you can never recover from it. 
Could there be any greater objective for Christian people anywhere than peace or earth, good will toward men?



638 - Television Address to the American People.
October 7, 1964

But today these established policies are under the severest attack. 
We are told we should consider using atomic weapons in Viet-Nam, even in Eastern Europe should there be an uprising. 
We are told we should break off relations with Russia--and with it any hope of lasting agreement. We are urged to withdraw from the United Nations and stop our help to other countries. 
We have heard the test ban treaty denounced. This is the treaty that has halted the radioactive poisoning of the air we breathe. 
We are urged to threaten others with force if they don't do as we say. 
We are told, in effect, to withdraw into an armed camp--with a few carefully selected friends--and try to intimidate our adversaries into submission. 
This kind of attack contradicts the entire course of America in the postwar period. 
If we should follow this course--if we should discard the tested policies of the last 20 years--the peace of the world will be in grave danger. 
I will not discard them. I will continue them. I will match firmness to strength. And I will continue, with all the skill at my command, the patient search for lasting peace.



643 - Remarks in Louisville, Ky., at a Breakfast for Indiana and Kentucky State Party Leaders.
October 9, 1964

The Communists, with their problems between Russia and China now--if you think we have some headaches just think about their problems among themselves. So the big question you have to decide, then, is: do you want to try to hold the country together and provide a bipartisan, nonpartisan foreign policy that will face up to these problems as Americans and not as party people, or do you want to change and go off in this new direction?



645 - Remarks at the War Memorial Building in Nashville.
October 9, 1964

I sat in 37 meetings of the National Security Council, with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and the Joint Chiefs in their gold uniforms, and the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, and the Chairman of the CIA and all of the great minds of this Government--37 long meetings during the Cuban missile crisis. 
I never left home in the morning knowing whether I would see my wife and babies when I got back that night. You have read of it. But I don't know whether you have ever felt those chill bumps come up on you or not, but I am not one that can't say I have never been scared. I have been scared most of my life, ever since they took me snipe hunting when I was a kid and they left me out in the dark. 
I was scared every moment that the Russians had their missiles there pointed toward this country. But I am proud to tell you that the coolest head in Washington during all that period was a man that is not here to answer the attacks on him today. 
The coolest man in Washington was President John Fitzgerald Kennedy. And ben cause of his caution and because of his care, and because of the steel in his spine and the brain in his head, the American leader and the Russian leader were there eyeball to eyeball, and after that confrontation over a very tense period, when the chips were down and the thumb moved toward the button, both leaders decided that they could never in the eyes of God justify wiping out humanity. 
And Mr. Khrushchev picked up his missiles and put them on the decks of his ships, and with our helicopters whirling overhead with their photographic machinery, he took them back home



650 - Remarks at the Municipal Park, South Gate, California.
October 11, 1964

Do you know that the Commander in Chief of this country and the leader of the Soviet Union hold the mightiest, the most awesome, the most frightening power at their thumb tips that any person could imagine? 
I sat in 37 meetings in the National Security Council with President Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis. I saw the men come in with the stars and the admirals come in with their braid and I saw them make their recommendations. And I saw a solemn Secretary of State, a wise and good man, and he said, "We are eyeball to eyeball." There were Mr. Khrushchev and his missiles in Cuba, 90 miles away, pointed at us. Our planes were ordered off the ground with their bomb bays loaded. Our whole military force was shifted in this country, moved in one direction. And every morning when I left home I didn't know if I would see my wife again that night. 
But I am proud to say to you, because he can't be here to defend himself, that the wisest and the coolest man that sat at that table was the President of the United States, John Fitzgerald Kennedy



662 - Remarks in New York City at the Annual Dinner of the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation.
October 14, 1964

It is true, for example, that communism is a deadly danger, but Russia is a different kind of danger from Yugoslavia. A small Communist Party in Africa is a different danger from the Government of Red China. These different dangers require different policies and different actions, and different replies

A second field of danger and opportunity is in our confrontation with Russia and Communist China. 
Today there is no longer one cold war; there are many. They differ in temperature, intensity, and danger. 
Our relations with the Soviet Union have come a long way since shoes were banged on desks here in New York and a summit meeting collapsed in Paris




667 - Remarks at the City Hall in Buffalo.
October 15, 1964

A few months ago, about 2 years ago, we all met at the White House and looked at the pictures, and saw the Russian missiles in Cuba 90 miles from our shore. We had a lot of advice about bombs and invasions and sending in the Marines. 
The President called every person that he could, including Republicans and Democrats from the Congress, Republican Director of the CIA, the Republican Secretary of Defense. They are all patriotic without regard to party. He tried to determine what he could do. He knew that he could mash a button and wipe out 100 million Russians in a matter of moments, and when he did that, they could mash a button and wipe out 100 million Americans. No sane man would want to mash that button and start that kind of an operation, but what else could you do? You couldn't sit there until the missiles were turned on us. 
We had trouble getting adequate communications, adequate information, adequate knowledge. A man's knowledge and a man's judgment are no better than the information he has. But out of those meetings, both leaders decided that it would be foolhardy, when they were eyeball to eyeball, to put their finger on that button. 
So Mr. Khrushchev pulled his missiles out of Cuba and took them back home, and he agreed to a test ban treaty. We celebrated the anniversary of it last Saturday



669 - Remarks in Madison Square Garden at a Rally of the Liberal Party of New York.
October 15, 1964

There is a seething in Africa and Asia tonight. Where our friends are strongest in Western Europe we are happy, but today there is an indication that there is a change in the Soviet Union. 
The announcement that Chairman Khrushchev has been replaced may or may not be a sign of deeper turmoil or may be a sign of changes in policies to come. But for ourselves, the need is clear: that we should keep steady on our goals--that peace is the mission of the American people, and we are not about to be deterred. We will be firm, but we will be restrained. We can meet any test, but our quest is always for peace





673 - Remarks at a Tree-Planting Ceremony at the White House.
October 16, 1964

We hope that the many who see these trees through years to come, will know that there lived here those who loved this land. And I am delighted that you would observe with us this very special historic moment. It is more historic today than you think. We have a change of leadership in the Soviet Union and we have an announcement that the Chinese have detonated their bomb, and we have a lot of things that we are dealing with. But it's nice that we could take a moment to come here in the quietness of this garden and make plans, preparations for our posterity



674 - Statement by the President Following a Meeting With the Russian Ambassador.
October 16, 1964

THIS MORNING I received Ambassador Dobrynin and talked with him for 45 minutes. The Ambassador brought me a first message from the new Soviet Government. The message stated the desire of the Soviet Government to continue in seeking for steps toward a more solid peace. 
I told the Ambassador that I welcomed this assurance and that the Soviet Government and all governments could rely on the determination of the United States to persevere steadfastly in its own proven determination to serve the cause of peace and international understanding. 
I reviewed the developments which have occurred in relations between the Soviet Government and the West in recent years and expressed the purpose of the United States to continue in the quest for peace



676 - Remarks Upon Signing Bill Amending the National Defense Education Act.
October 16, 1964

I have just been in a meeting with the Ambassador from the Soviet Union. They have a new government in the Soviet Union. And new governments bring new problems. We spent 45 minutes--he, assuring me that he was directed, on behalf of the new government, to tell our people that they wanted to continue to explore with us every possible means of achieving better understanding and relieving the tensions in the world



678 - Remarks Upon Arrival at the Greater Cincinnati Airport.
October 16, 1964

Then I visited for about an hour with the Soviet Ambassador, and he told me of the problems that exist in their country today, and the new government that has just taken over from Premier Khrushchev. One man runs the government and one runs the party. He assured me of the friendship of their people for our people and he wanted to make it clear that he was instructed by the new government to inform our Government that there had been and there would be no change in their foreign policy and their attitude toward us and their hope that we could, together, find some way to peace in the world, some way to reduce our armaments, and some way to relieve the tensions. 
When I finished talking with the Soviet Ambassador, I met with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council, and the Under Secretary of State, and we talked about the problems in southeast Asia, and our forces in Viet-Nam. We talked about the implications of the new government in the Soviet Union and why they had decided to change. We took all of the reports we had received and evaluated them. The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State stayed on later, and the Security Council will meet tomorrow to further go into those problems. 
I then went over and met with the leading educators from all over the country, and we signed one of the most comprehensive education bills in the history of this country. We talked about the great increased need of educated minds in our country, and how many people were unemployed because they had no specific training, and how in this space age, when the Soviet Union was sending three men into space, and when the Chinese nation has developed the nuclear bomb, how important it is for every child in this land to have all the education that he is capable of taking




680 - Remarks on the City Hall Steps, Dayton, Ohio.
October 16, 1964

I then received the Russian Ambassador, Mr. Dobrynin. He came in and for almost an hour he gave me a message from the new rulers in the Kremlin. He told me that it was the hope of the people in the Soviet Union that they could continue their search for peace with us, that somehow, some way, we must find a way to live in the world together, without wiping each other out with nuclear bombs. 
I told him that our policy would not change, that we were the strongest and the mightiest nation in the world, but that strength would be used for deterrents, that we did not rattle our rockets and we did not bluff with our bombs; that our guard was always up, but our hand was always out. I told him we preferred to judge men by their acts instead of their words
Luci told me, "There is no use of your going out there, I have already been to Dayton." But I said, "Wouldn't it really be better for us, wouldn't it be better for the Soviet Union, wouldn't it be better for Great Britain, wouldn't it be better for Germany, wouldn't it be better for all the people of the world who are looking to us for leadership if we carried Ohio by 400,000 instead of 300,000?" 




686 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on Recent Events in Russia, China, and Great Britain.
October 18, 1964

On Thursday of last week, from the Kremlin in Moscow, the Soviet Government announced a change in its leadership

Now, let me begin with events in Moscow. We do not know exactly what happened to Nikita Khrushchev last Thursday. We do know that he has been forced out of power by his former friends and colleagues. Five days ago he had only praise in Moscow. Today we learn only of his faults. 
Yet the men at the top today are the same men that he picked for leadership. These men carried on the administration of the Soviet Government when he was absent from the Soviet capital, and that was nearly half of the time that he was in power. 
Mr. Khrushchev was clearly the dominant figure in making Soviet policy. After Lenin and Stalin, he is only the third man in history to have made himself the undisputed master of Communist Russia. 
There were times when he was guilty of dangerous adventure. It required great American firmness and good sense--first in Berlin and later in the Cuban missile crisis-to turn back his threats and actions without war. 
Yet he learned from his mistakes and he was not blind to realities. In the last 2 years, his government had shown itself aware of the need for sanity in the nuclear age. 
He joined in the nuclear test ban treaty. He joined in the "hot line" which can help prevent a war by accident. He agreed that space should be kept free of nuclear weapons. In these actions he demonstrated good sense and sober judgment. We do not think it was these actions that led to his removal. 
We cannot know for sure just what did lead to this secret decision. Our intelligence estimate is that Khrushchev learned of the decision only when for him it was too late. 
There has been discontent and strain and failure--both within the Soviet Union and within the Communist bloc as a whole. All of this has been evident for all to see. These troubles are not the creation of one man. They will not end with his removal. 
When Lenin died in 1924, Stalin took 4 years to consolidate his power. When Stalin died in 1953, it was not Mr. Khrushchev who first emerged. 
But two men now share top responsibility in the Soviet Union, and their exact relation to each other and to their colleagues is not yet very clear. They are experienced, but younger men, and perhaps less rooted in the past. They are said to be realistic. We can hope that they will share with us our great objective--the prevention of nuclear war. 
But what does all this mean for us in America? It means at least four things: 
First, we must never forget that the men in the Kremlin remain dedicated, dangerous Communists. A time of trouble among Communists requires steady vigilance among free men--and most of all among Americans. For it is the strength of the United States that holds the balance firm against danger. 
Second, there will be turmoil in the Communist world. It is likely that the men in the Kremlin will be concerned primarily with problems of communism. This would not be all good, because there are problems and issues that need attention between our world and theirs. But it is not all bad, because men who are busy with internal problems may not be tempted to reckless external acts. 
Third, this great change will not stop the forces in Eastern Europe that are working for greater independence. Those forces will continue to have our sympathy. We will not give up our hope of building new bridges to these peoples. 
Fourth, our own course must continue to prove that we on our side are ready to get on with the work of peace. 
The new Soviet Government has officially informed me, through Ambassador Dobrynin, day before yesterday, that it plans no change in basic foreign policy. I spoke frankly, as always, to the Soviet Ambassador. I told him that the quest for peace in America had never been more determined than it is now. I told him that we intend to bury no one, and we do not intend to be buried. I reminded the Ambassador of the danger that we all faced 2 years ago in Cuba. I told him that any Soviet Government which is ready to work for peace will find us ready in America. I said to the Ambassador that I would be ready to talk to anyone, when it would help the cause of peace. 
I believe that this was a good beginning, on both sides. 
At first, in the 1950's, Russia helped the Chinese. This assistance in the spread of nuclear weapons may now be regarded with some dismay in Moscow. We believe that this help was ended in 1960 as the quarrel among the Communists grew sharper. Soviet technicians left suddenly, with their blueprints under their arms. And the unfinished facilities were just left there standing, and the expected supplies were cut off

Third, we continue to believe that the struggle against nuclear spread is as much in the Soviet interest as in our own. We will be ready to join with them and all the world--in working to avoid it



688 - The President's News Conference
October 19, 1964

We have a new government in India. We have a new government in Russia. And I want to draw upon their wide experience on a bipartisan basis, from Lovett and McCloy and Dean and Kistiakowsky, Dean Acheson, all of whom I have had individual talks with in the last few days, but I want to have their collective thinking

THE PRESIDENT. [1.] Today the President held his 12th meeting with the Members of the leadership of both parties in the Congress and related his observations resulting from his personal conversation with British Prime Minister Wilson, Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin, and other Government leaders. 
The President presented to the leadership a highly classified briefing on recent events in the Soviet Union and Communist China
Ambassador Thompson2 discussed the probable causes and estimated meaning of the removal of Chairman Khrushchev and reviewed the evidence with which political developments in the Soviet Union are observed, assessed, and analyzed by U.S. experts




693 - Remarks in Memorial Hall, Akron University.
October 21, 1964

The Soviet Union has decided to select others to lead their people. So now in the next 2 weeks you Americans are going to be watched and looked upon for your decision

Last week, the Soviet Union threw out its old leadership and put new men at the top

No one advised me to break off relations with the Soviet Union. Instead, we discussed ways to make our relations with the new Soviet leadership more productive

I will continue to work to find areas of common interest with the Soviet Union. We do not know what course the new Russian leaders will follow. But if they are willing to seek peace, if they sincerely and genuinely want peace, then I can say to them and I can say to you they will find the United States ready. 
Our scientists are working with their scientists, and their scientists were here a few days ago and I sent them by plane to some of our great desalinization plants which offer one of the really great hopes for all the people of the world, when we can take the water from the sea and convert it, take the salt out of it, and we can use the oceans to make the deserts bloom. 
It is not really important how a man spells his name if we can find theright answer to it. We have these brilliant scientific geniuses from several countries working with us to find that answer. We have already gotten it down where we can produce it for less than $1 a thousand, but if we can get it down to where we can produce it for 25 percent of that amount it will be a great victory for humanity all through the 3 billion people in the world. 
I intend to pursue goals of this kind. I intend to submit new proposals in Geneva to slow down the arms race, and to lessen the tensions and lessen the danger of war. And I hope that we can get agreements from other nations to do the same thing. We are going to keep on trying. 
I can assure you that your country is the mightiest nation in all the world. But we do not intend to use that might to bury anyone. And we want all to know and read us loud and clear: we do not intend to be buried, either
Here are two great powers. When they put their thumb on the button, they can kill 100 million Americans in a matter of hours. When we move our thumb up on that button and sound the alarm, and the bell rings, we can kill 100 million Russians in a few hours. A total of 300 million people could be wiped out from daylight to dark




694 - Remarks in Belleville, Illinois.
October 21, 1964

I believe we must turn back Communist aggression wherever it threatens. But at the same time, I believe that we must work patiently and calmly to ease the tensions in the world just as we tried to ease the tensions and the differences in our own communities. 
I believe that we can never turn our back on the Communists or relax our guard. But I believe that we can, and I believe that we must, try to convince them that peace is just as much in the interest of their people as it is in the interest of our people. 
I believe that we can put twice as many intercontinental ballistic missiles over the Soviet Union as they can put over America. But I also know that the Russians have the power to kill millions of my people. There would not be "total" victory, but there would be "total" devastation, and the survivors would be jealous of the dead. 
In such a world as this, a nuclear world, there is no room to rattle our rockets, or to bluster and bluff and be belligerent. There is room only for courage and intelligence and reason. There are some people who may believe differently
We have new governments in Germany, England, in the Soviet Union, Italy, and other places. They have seen the transition that has taken place since President Kennedy was taken from us. They are looking to see what kind of leadership you are going to select




701 - Remarks on the River Front in Memphis.
October 24, 1964

We live no more in the age of the cavalry charge. If nuclear war should ever come, the casualties of the first exchange would leave dead in the United States and Russia 400 times more men, women, and children than the entire population of Memphis today. So if peace is to be preserved, American voters, like American leaders, must be right the first time, for there will be no second time



702 - Remarks at an Airport Rally in Chattanooga.
October 24, 1964

I had sat with John F. Kennedy through many perilous moments. I sat in 37 meetings of the National Security Council with him when Mr. Khrushchev had brought his missiles into Cuba, 90 miles from the United States, and they were pointed toward our people. 
I saw our leader meet there day after day with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, with our leading naval authorities, our leading military men, our leading aviators. 
I heard the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the CIA all give their judgments. 
I am proud to say that the coolest man in that room was our own Commander in Chief, the President of the United States, John Fitzgerald Kennedy. He was firm and steady. He was not frightened, but he was not provocative. 
He did not rattle his rockets, and he did not bluff with his bombs, although he ordered our planes off the ground, fully loaded, fully prepared for any emergency. But he showed great patience and great judgment, and as a consequence we avoided a nuclear holocaust that would have wiped out 100 million Americans, over half of our population, in one day's time, and would have killed 100 million Russians in the same period of time




709 - Remarks in Boca Raton at the Dedication of Florida Atlantic University.
October 25, 1964

So I implore you to recognize before it is to late that while the Soviet Union can put up Sputnik I, and while we are debating about it, Sputnik II is saying "Beep, beep, beep" in the sky, that we are sometimes mighty slow to start, but mighty hard to stop. We don't need argumentation about the desirability of preparing our children to think and to act with judgment.



727 - Remarks in Boston at Post Office Square.
October 27, 1964

Second, he said, were we truly men of judgment? The answer to this question is also yes. We saw that judgment after Cuba. We did not press our victory or try to humiliate the Soviet Union. Instead, he seized the chance to move toward meaningful and lasting settlements which might lessen the danger of war. One of the results was the test ban treaty



728 - Remarks at the Civic Center Arena in Pittsburgh.
October 27, 1964

Eleven months and three days ago my mind went back to that terrible tragic period during the Cuban crisis, when I saw the generals with all their stars and the admirals with all their braid, and the Secretary of State with all of his diplomatic background, and the Secretary of Defense with his great industrial experience march into a room to try to decide what to do about the Russian missiles that were located 90 miles from our shore, that were pointed at us and might be operational any moment. 
I never left home a single day during those 38 sessions that I knew for sure I would see my wife and daughters again that night. 
And there amidst the best brains and the greatest advice that a President could collect, a young, fearless man sat at the head of the table as Commander in Chief. I am proud to tell you that John F. Kennedy was the coolest man in that room. 
As he and the leader of the Soviet Union came eyeball to eyeball, and their thumbs started inching up--that was the day before the "hot line" when you could pick up the phone and Moscow would be calling--their thumbs started getting closer to that nuclear button, their knives were in each other's ribs almost, literally speaking, and neither of them was flinching or quivering. About that moment, Mr. Khrushchev in his wisdom decided that he would wrap up his missiles and take them home. 
Our bombers were in the skies and our bomb bays were ready to be opened. They were loaded. Our ships were in their proper places. Our men had their proper instructions. But when the time finally came, the good Lord somehow or other decreed that there would not be a nuclear holocaust that would wipe out the lives of 300 million people, 100 million right here in our own land



733 - Remarks at City Hall in Los Angeles.
October 28, 1964

If we are going to compete with the Soviet Union, we are not only going to have to have the best heels and the best hearts that we can, but we are going to have to have the best heads. You don't want some boy that went to a red schoolhouse and dropped out in the third grade and went off as a road hand like I did when I ran off to California when I finished school, you don't want him to be in your spaceship with John Glenn orbiting the earth. You want somebody that knows where the buttons are and how to mash them and touch them

I saw President Kennedy in the Cuban crisis in 38 different meetings, and we got up to the last hours. Khrushchev had his missiles trained on this country that would completely wipe out San Francisco and Los Angeles. There would be no life left. 
Those men stood there, one speaking for the United States and the free world, and the other speaking for the Communist world. They got eyeball to eyeball, and I saw the generals with their stars come into the room and the admirals with their braid, and the Secretary of State with all of his diplomatic experience. I listened to every word. 
I never left home a single morning that I knew I would get back that night to see Lady Bird and those daughters. 
So as a little boy in my country used to say, we were doing some pretty heavy thinking, because we were right up to the gun. But Mr. Kennedy put his knife right there in his ribs and he held it, Khrushchev put his there and he held it, and neither one of them shook or trembled or developed palsy; neither one of them wobbled. Our planes were in the air. They had their bombs in them. Our Navy was on the seas; they were ready. 
But Mr. Khrushchev finally decided rather than to see 300 million people killed and the Soviet Union wiped out--and they could wipe out America, too--that humiliating as it was, it might be a little wiser to wrap up his missiles in those tarpaulins and put them on those ships and take them back home, and that is what he did
The fourth horizon--some of these people don't understand horizons because they look backward, they don't look forward-the fourth horizon is the horizon of discovery. We face the unknown challenge of outer space. When the Russians sent up Sputnik I, anybody that could read and write in this country got frightened. 
I immediately went to Washington and called an investigation, and we had the best military experts in the world come there and testify. While they were testifying, the Russians sent up Sputnik II, "Beep, beep, beep," around in the air


734 - Remarks at the Riverside, California, County Courthouse.
October 28, 1964

We have a new government in Germany, Chancellor Erhard. We have a labor government in Great Britain that has only a majority of four votes. We have a new government in Italy. Only last week we found that Mr. Khrushchev was dispossessed and deposed and we have two men running the Soviet Union. The big question you have to decide is how can the United States formulate a policy and prepare a program that can get these people to learn to live in a world together without using our rockets and without dropping our bombs, and without killing humanity
Our photographs showed us that the Soviet Union had brought within 90 miles of our shores enough missiles to seriously handicap and destroy large portions of this country. There were some people that said, "Send in the Marines." There were some people that said, "Push the button; drop the bombs." There were some people who said, "Put your planes in the air and load them and tell them to put up or shut up." 
And for 38 meetings we met there in the Cabinet Room, morning, afternoon, past midnight many nights. Pierre Salinger sat in those meetings. The men with the stars on their shoulders who represent our Chiefs of Staff sat in those meetings. The admirals with the braid on their arms, they came, they learned, they saw, and they recommended. The Secretary of State with all his diplomatic experience, a Rhodes scholar, sat there with furrows in his forehead and tried to decide what course we could follow. 
I never left home a single morning but what I thought I might not see my wife and daughters again that night, because we did not know when those missiles would become operational. 
But during that whole period, the man that we have heard heckled and harassed, the man that we have heard in the last few days criticized when he is not here to answer himself, the man that was your President, your Commander in Chief, was the coolest man in that room, and his name was John Fitzgerald Kennedy. 
He didn't shoot from the hip. He didn't talk first and think afterwards. He didn't get confused. He listened and he learned, and finally on the last hour as the clock was ticking and we were within moments of action, Mr. Khrushchev came in with a letter and he wrapped up his missiles in his tarpaulin canvases, he put them on his boats, while our helicopters flew over their decks, and we watched them take them out one by one by one. A war was prevented, a Republic was saved



735 - Remarks at a Rally in San Bernardino.
October 28, 1964

There are great and there are troubling changes that are going on in the world today. In the space of 24 hours, Mr. Khrushchev has toppled in the Soviet Union. In a space of 24 hours, 700 million Chinese, more than 3 1/2 times our population, have exploded a new nuclear bomb, and the government in Great Britain has a sudden change and only has a majority of four. When such changes come upon the world, then that is the time for the United States to be prudent, to be stable, to be sound, to be sure, and to act. But before we act we must think. We just can't guess



737 - Remarks in Salt Lake City at the Mormon Tabernacle.
October 29, 1964

All political systems change. They are forced to by historic circumstance. And it would be dangerously foolish to believe that Soviet Russia or Communist China will soon become open societies. But it would be equally foolish to think that they will never change. Inside Russia, the Soviet Union, today a powerful force for change is already at work. Education, the bedrock of democracy, the enemy of dictatorship, is plowing its way. 
Inside the Communist bloc, powerful currents are surging against the dam. Premier Khrushchev a short time before he was deposed, speaking of some of the satellite countries, said, "Like children, they have grown up and now are too large to spank." 
When the Soviet Government changed governments last week, I sent word to Moscow that America's basic policy remained unchanged. This week I received an answer from Mr. Kosygin. He is the new head of the Soviet Government. In his response he said that the Soviet Union would maintain its present policies and would seek better relations and maintain its own search for peace with the West. He said that the Soviet Union would continue its communication with the United States. 
The Ambassador of the Soviet Union came to spend an hour with me. He said that the Soviet Union would continue to explore areas of mutual interest. 
Well, this is a heartening response. We must never underestimate the danger of communism, but neither should we underestimate the danger to all of us and to all of the world if nuclear bombs are unleashed and in a moment of anger we should wipe out the lives of millions that we can never restore if we do not constantly, uppermost, as our first priority, seek and search and plead and pray that we may find a way toward peace.




745 - Remarks at an Airport Rally in Detroit.
October 30, 1964

We all pray that we will never have to move that thumb toward that button again. We all pray that we will somehow, some way, learn how to live in the world with other people. But we do know that we have a new government in Russia in the last few days, and we do know that Mr. Khrushchev is no longer the leader of that country. We do know that the Chinese have developed a nuclear bomb, and that they have 700 million people to develop more of them



746 - Remarks in Kosciusko Park, Milwaukee.
October 30, 1964

Red China has challenged the Soviet Union for leadership of the Communist camp, and the restless stirrings in Europe suggest that Moscow can no longer impose its will on the tragic captive countries of Eastern Europe. Mr. Khrushchev is reputed to have said not long ago that the satellite countries had already grown up-like children, they were too big to spank any more

You are the masters. This will be as important a decision as you have ever been called upon to make, because we have a new leader in the Soviet Union, you have 700 million people in China that have the nuclear bomb, you have a new British labor government, you have a new government in Germany, a new government in Italy. You have all these problems of the world, and we have Viet-Nam, we have Cyprus, we have Laos. We have 120 nations and we are trying our best to lead them in the direction of peace



747 - Remarks at an Airport Rally in Rockford, Illinois.
October 30, 1964

In these dark days, in these hours of danger, when the Soviet Government changed their rulers only last week, America cannot march under a Republican flag or a Democratic flag. America can and America must march only under one flag of one nation, of one people



750 - Remarks at an Airport Rally in Wilmington, Delaware.
October 31, 1964

The Soviet Union last week changed its leaders. We don't know what that means for America. Mr. Khrushchev is no longer in charge. We don't know what it means. But Mr. Khrushchev sat there 2 years ago with Mr. Kennedy, our President, and they were eyeball to eyeball, and I sat in those meetings, 38 meetings, when the National Security Council met and those missiles were pointed towards us, 90 miles off our shores in Cuba. 
We have an old saying in Texas--you may not have ever heard it: "Any jackass can kick a barn down, but it takes a good carpenter to build one." So we want to be careful and not kick anything down. We want to be careful not to start anything that would wipe out a hundred million Americans, and wipe out a hundred million Soviets. So we considered and we thought and we deliberated. I sat there as Vice President, I am proud to tell you


762 - Remarks at a Rally in Pasadena, Texas.
November 2, 1964

The Soviet Union had moved their missiles into Cuba, 90 miles from the United States. They had them trained on this country. Mr. Khrushchev and Mr. Kennedy, both leaders of great powers, were there eyeball to eyeball looking at each other, almost with a knife at each other's ribs, just holding it steady and not showing any weakness, either one. 
The Army came in with all the generals and the Air Force with all their stars, and the Navy with their gold braid, and the best minds that we had in America tried to advise us what to do. Some men were saying, "Send in the Marines." Some men were saying, "Let's load our bombs and get going." Some said, "Let's have an invasion before it is too late." 
Thirty-eight times we met in serious meetings of that Security Council in the Cabinet Room. I never left home a single morning when I knew whether I would see my wife and daughters again that night. But that was an experience that I will never forget, and I think most of you remember. 
I am mighty happy that during that period when the hotheads were around and when people were yelling all kinds of advice, that the coolest, the calmest, the ablest man in that room was the man that you had selected as Commander in Chief, your President, John Fitzgerald Kennedy. He tried his best to serve you, but he was given only 3 years, and he was taken from us.




780 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
November 28, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We have no plans for such a meeting

THE PRESIDENT. No. I never had an engagement in Dallas, and I did not cancel any engagements. There was some tentative planning that included a number of visits in Texas. We did not confirm those and we were unable to continue with our planning in that regard because of developments regarding the Chinese nuclear situation and the change of government in Russia.



788 - Remarks at the 175th Anniversary Convocation of Georgetown University.
December 3, 1964

The Coal and Steel Community, the integration of Germany into NATO, the Common Market, itself--raise some blood pressures among excitable people, arouse question and concern and warning. And we were told that such steps might be against the interests of America. We were told that it might become harder to deal with the Soviet Union. We were told that we might encourage German militarism. We were told that we might divide Europe or arouse hostilities

Most of all, the Atlantic nations have a common interest in the peace of the world. In the past 4 years, we have taken several steps toward lessening the danger of war. The United States is prepared in full consultation with its allies to discuss any proposal with the Soviet Union which might increase the chances of a lasting peace



804 - Remarks to the Members of a Delegation of Industrial Research Leaders Upon Their Return From the Soviet Union.
December 15, 1964

I am very happy to have heard your impressions of Soviet science and technology, based on your 2-week visit to Soviet Russia. I am especially grateful to you men from industry who gave so much of your time to make this trip and to prepare for it and present your conclusions. This is another fine example of the willingness of American businessmen and scientists to give of themselves for the public good. 
I am especially glad that you got to meet so many people in Russia and had such lengthy conversations with them. It is important for us to know the people and to understand as much as we can about their economic development. It is good to hear that the people you met in the research laboratories, factories, and schools throughout the country showed such a lively interest in America and wanted to enter into contact with Americans by visits and correspondence. I was especially interested to hear that this was as true of people out in the middle of Siberia as it was in Moscow and Leningrad. 
Visits like yours help us to get to know the Russian people better, to know their country and see their accomplishments and problems at first hand. We are hoping to cooperate with them in water desalting and perhaps other specific fields of technology that benefit mankind. I hope there will be more trips like yours, in both directions, and I am asking all agencies of the Government on our side to make sure that we're going as far as we can to extend this hand of peaceful contact to the Soviet people, without in any way endangering our security




2 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union
January 4, 1965

With the Soviet Union we seek peaceful understandings that can lessen the danger to freedom. 
If we are to live together in peace, we must come to know each other better. 
I am sure that the American people would welcome a chance to listen to the Soviet leaders on our television--as I would like the Soviet people to hear our leaders on theirs. 
I hope the new Soviet leaders can visit America so they can learn about our country at firsthand. 
In Eastern Europe restless nations are slowly beginning to assert their identity. Your Government, assisted by the leaders in American labor and business, is now exploring ways to increase peaceful trade with these countries and with the Soviet Union. I will report our conclusions to the Congress



4 - Remarks to a Group of Business Leaders Upon Their Return From a Visit to Moscow.
January 7, 1965

It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the White House this morning and to thank you for spending the day in Washington to tell us about your recent conversations in Moscow and about the prospects for trade between ourselves and the Soviet Union. 
The Science Adviser to the President brought in a group the other day that had accompanied him to the Soviet Union, men from the Bell Laboratories and IBM and other prominent industrialists, and I spent a very fruitful few minutes listening to their experiences and to their recommendations. 
I think all of you know your Government is committed to explore ways to increase peaceful trade with the Soviet Union and with the countries of Eastern Europe. Now the leaders of both business and labor have had some exchanges and have some good solid recommendations, some of which you made this morning and we will want to pursue further. I am confident that the results of these meetings will, and these trips, these exchanges, will be to improve both our understanding and theirs of what must be done if we are to take advantage of the possibility of trade between us. 
As I observed a night or so ago when I addressed the Congress, if we are to live together in peace, we must know each other better. A long axiom in my political thinking has been that a man's judgment is no better than his information on any given subject. You men who have gone there and made a study of these problems are bringing the American people information which is quite essential to their determining what is a wise policy for this Nation. I think there is no better way to come to know each other than to engage in peaceful and profitable commerce together. I think it is extremely important that we constantly keep in view our own national interest and what is best for our own country, and these exchanges no doubt will help some of you to point up what is best for our national interest.



22 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
January 16, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. No, I said I didn't think I had anything to add this morning to what l said in my State of the Union Message

THE PRESIDENT. We have extended them an invitation and have had some discussions with some of their leaders, but at this time I am not in a position to go further than I did in my State of the Union Message



44 - Remarks Upon Receiving the Anti-Defamation League Award
February 3, 1965

Toward that end, when I spoke last month to the Congress, I expressed the hope that the new leadership of the Soviet Union might come and visit our land--come to see us, to meet us, to learn firsthand the determination here in our beloved America for peace and the equal determination to support freedom. 
I am gratified that this expression is receiving the active, the constructive--and, I hope, the fruitful--attention and the interest of the Soviet Government. 
I have reason to believe that the Soviet leadership would welcome my visit to their country--as I would be very glad to do. I am hopeful that before the year is out this exchange of visits between us may occur. As I have said so often before, the longest journey begins with a single step--and I believe that such visits would reassure an anxious world that our two nations are each striving toward the goal of peace




46 - The President's News Conference
February 4, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. No. I think the statements I made last night 3 were made in the light of the information we have at the moment and the judgments that we have exercised. I said that I had reason to believe-that the reason to believe was based upon discussions that have taken place between the representatives of the Government of the United States and the Soviet Union. The details of the exchanges will be made public as soon as they are definite



117 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
March 20, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we sent them a wire congratulating them and expressing our good wishes for the successful outcome of one of their tests.6 Administrator Webb 7 is here today. He came in last night from New Mexico where he has been on an official visit. I asked him to be here this morning. He and I have reviewed the Russian activity in space this week, as well as our own planned activity next week. 
The Soviet accomplishment and our own scheduled efforts demonstrate, I think, dramatically and convincingly the important role that man himself will play in the exploration of the space frontier. The continuing efforts of both our program and the Russian program will steadily produce new capabilities and new space activities. 
These capabilities, in my judgment, will help each nation achieve broader confidence to do what they consider they ought to do in space. 
I have felt since the days when I introduced the space act and sat studying Sputnik I and Sputnik II that it was really a mistake to regard space exploration as a contest which can be tallied on any box score. Judgments can be made only by considering all the objectives of the two national programs, and they will vary and they will differ. 
Now the progress of our program is very satisfactory to me in every respect. We arecommitted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind. We stressed that in our hearings and our legislation when we passed the bill. And while the Soviet is ahead of us in some aspects of space, U.S. leadership is clear and decisive and we are ahead of them in other realms on which we have particularly concentrated. 



156 - The President's News Conference
April 1, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the statement that I made 9 is still as I made it, that I would welcome a visit from them, and I don't know how many times you want to hear it. Maybe at the moment such a visit would not appeal to the people of Russia or the leaders of Russia, but I extended the invitation and it was a genuine one. I would be very happy to see them accept it because I think when we know each other better, when they learn what we are doing here in America, that there will be better understanding. I would be happy to welcome them



172 - Address at Johns Hopkins University: "Peace Without Conquest."
April 7, 1965

And I would hope that all other industrialized countries, including the Soviet Union, will join in this effort to replace despair with hope, and terror with progress

The ordinary men and women of North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam--of China and India--of Russia and America--are brave people. They are filled with the same proportions of hate and fear, of love and hope. Most of them want the same things for themselves and their families. Most of them do not want their sons to ever die in battle, or to see their homes, or the homes of others, destroyed


