MID 418301, Canada v. US
March 26 to April 25, 1997 – May 28, 1997
(Search for Canad)



Remarks at a Democratic Business Council Dinner
April 2, 1997

The second thing I want to say is we need to continue to expand trade. I'm going to Latin America later this year. I have to go—because of my injury now, I have to go in two legs. I'm going to Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean; then I'm going to go back to South America later in the year. There's some controversy, I know, still, about whether we did the right thing in NAFTA or not. All I can tell you is our exports are at an all-time high as a percentage of our economy. And export jobs, on the whole, pay better. And for whatever our difficulties with Mexico are, if you look back at the last time the Mexican economy collapsed before NAFTA 10 years previously, they were 2 or 3 times as rough then. We have been in much better shape because we have created a trading bloc with Canada and Mexico. And we have to do more trade with our neighbors in Central and South America. We have to do it


Remarks Welcoming Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada
April 8, 1997

Prime Minister and Mrs. Chretien, members of the Canadian delegation, distinguished guests, it is a great honor and personal pleasure for me to welcome to Washington the Prime Minister of Canada, Jean Chretien, leader of a land of great beauty and bounty and a great and good people. 
When Hillary and I visited Ottawa in 1995, the Prime Minister and the Canadian people made us feel as if we were family. The personal working relationship I have established with the Prime Minister for nearly 4 years now has made us good friends. 
Today we celebrate one of history's most remarkable partnerships, for if nature has made us neighbors, we are friends and allies by choice. The close cooperation between our two nations should be a model for the world in the 21st century. Every day, 250,000 people and nearly $1 billion in trade cross our border. From the snowy Yukon to the shores of eastern Maine, our border does not divide our people; it joins us as partners and friends, with more and better jobs, cleaner air and water, the comforting knowledge that our freedom is jointly guarded and defended. Together we are working to shape the force of change to serve our region and our world, expanding trade throughout the Americas, exploring the mysteries of space, speaking out for freedom, and standing up for peace from Bosnia to Haiti. In a world where suffering too often results because people cannot live with others different from themselves, Canada's compassionate, tolerant society inspires us all with hope. 
A Canadian Ambassador to Washington once said that summits between our nations are a time to set the beacon jointly. Under your wise leadership, Mr. Prime Minister, relations between the United States and Canada have never been closer or more constructive. As we stand on the threshold of a new millennium, let us raise our beacon high. Let us build a future of peace and prosperity, of freedom and dignity for our continent and beyond.


Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada and an Exchange With Reporters
April 8, 1997

President Clinton. Let me say again how pleased I am to have the Prime Minister here. We're going to have a chance to talk about our mutual interests in NATO expansion, in Bosnia, in Haiti, and a number of bilateral issues between us. And of course, we're going to have some good agreements signed on this trip, so I think this will be a very useful and productive trip. I know it will be for me, and I hope it will be for the Prime Minister and for Canada. And again, I want to welcome you

President Clinton. Well, I think we have a difference of opinion. I think the real issue is how we manage our differences right now. And we'll talk about that. 
The Cuba issue is a difficult issue, but Canada has had a very solid position on human rights, generally. And we just have a different approach here, and we'll try to find a way to manage our differences. I think that's the best way we can do it.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada
April 8, 1997

President Clinton. Good afternoon. Let me say again that it is a very great pleasure for me to welcome Prime Minister Chretien to the White House. It's an especially important day in his life, because this is the 34th anniversary of Jean Chretien's first election to the Canadian Parliament. In the years since, he has held virtually every high office in the Canadian Government. He has traveled to Washington on countless missions. But this is his first official visit as Prime Minister, and I'm delighted that he's here. 
It's fair to say that there has never been a relationship between two nations like the one that exists today between the United States and Canada. We have the most comprehensive ties of any two nations on Earth. Every day, our Governments work together to improve the lives of our people in ways no one could have imagined just a few years ago. We trade goods and services on an unprecedented scale and share ties of friendship that are unique. 
We've worked hard today and made progress on important issues. We discussed our common efforts to create an open and more competitive trading system throughout our hemisphere. The benefits of this effort will be tremendous. Since NAFTA took effect, trade between our nations has grown by more than 40 percent, a remarkable achievement for what was already the world's preeminent trade partnership. United States exports to Canada have grown over $133 million and now support more than 1 1/2 million jobs in our Nation. As partners in the Summit of the Americas process, our efforts to expand trade in our hemisphere not only increase prosperity, they also reinforce democratic values, which have made such extraordinary progress in the Americas in our time. 
Today we've made concrete progress on key issues involving our two nations. We've agreed on new measures to crack down on criminals who use cross-border fraudulent telemarketing schemes to prey on the elderly and others. We're stepping up our cooperation to stop those who would abduct children and transport them across our borders. We agreed to modernize our border crossing so that by the year 2000, 22 pairs of towns will be equipped with remote video systems and new technologies to give them 24-hour service, and residents won't have to drive hours out of their way to the next border crossing. We're streamlining import and export processing, cutting freight costs, reducing truck backups. 
We're working together to protect, clean, and manage the natural heritage we share. Twentyfive years ago, our nations signed the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, which has helped to revive the ecosystem of the Great Lakes Basin. Yesterday, Minister Marchi and EPA Administrator Browner signed an agreement to work for the virtual elimination of toxic pollutants in the Great Lakes. This unprecedented environmental effort will involve the public and private sectors at all levels. There are some other areas, like Pacific salmon fisheries, where further progress is needed. But we're working on it. 
Beyond our borders, we discussed the preparations for the July NATO summit in Madrid, where the Atlantic alliance will take a major step toward creating security for the 21st century. 
I also want to salute the Prime Minister for his government's determination to support peace in Bosnia and Central Africa and other troubled places of the globe and especially for his nation's steadfast engagement in Haiti. Canada's efforts to help democracy put down strong roots in Haiti will long be remembered as a hallmark of the commitment to principle of the Canadian people. 
Our work together spans the globe. It reaches into the heavens. I'm pleased that the Prime Minister has brought with him today a model of the remarkable 11-foot Canada Hand that will be used to build the international space station. I have personally seen it in its full size, Mr. Prime Minister, and it is a dramatic and important contribution. This instrument will perform delicate assembly work essential for the space station's construction. And I thank you and your Cabinet for voting last month to fund this important project. 
Soon, Canada and the United States will be joined at the elbow in space, and that is a perfect symbol of the cooperation between our nations. Here on Earth, this cooperation has been a beacon of hope for countries on every continent. Today we've made that light brighter by reaffirming the ties between our nations and carrying forward our work together. 
Mr. Prime Minister, I thank you, your government, and all of Canada for your dedication to this extraordinary partnership
President Clinton. Well, let me say we have discussed this. It's being handled in accordance with Canadian law. But I believe the FBI put out a statement about it today, and we are fully satisfied with our cooperation with Canada at this point, and I think we have to let the Canadian legal process play itself out. 
President Clinton. Well, the United States— it's not just my position; we have long felt that our relationship with a united Canada was a good thing and that people of different cultures and backgrounds live together in peace and harmony with still some decent respect for their differences in both our two countries. And I would be—I haven't changed my view about that, and I haven't changed my relationship with the Prime Minister, so I don't know what else to tell you. My feelings have not changed
President Clinton. No, but neither one of us has succeeded yet. I mean, the evidence doesn't—since there hasn't been appreciable change in the Cuban regime, neither of our policies can claim success. But this is an area where I think we have an honest political disagreement. The Prime Minister characterized it earlier: We have the same objectives; we differ about how to pursue it. And since neither one of us has succeeded, we really can't know



Remarks at a State Dinner Honoring Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada
April 8, 1997

Prime Minister and Mrs. Chretien, Ambassador and Mrs. Chretien, distinguished Canadian guests and my fellow Americans: It has been a real honor for me to welcome the Prime Minister and Mrs. Chretien to Washington and to do our best to return the warm hospitality that Hillary and I received in Ottawa 2 years ago. 
The whole state visit has gone exactly as planned, except we didn't get to play golf. [Laughter] Now, the last time the Prime Minister and I played, we played exactly to a tie. The press corps had a field day trying to figure out how long it took the Ambassadors to negotiate that result. [Laughter] But we wanted to give some truly symbolic, ego-overriding manifestation of the equal partnership between the United States and Canada. 
From the start of his career in public life— and for those of you who were not here earlier, Jean Chretien was elected to Parliament at the age of 29, exactly 34 years ago today. Throughout those years, he has brought passion and compassion to every endeavor. He has held almost every post in the Canadian Government at one time or another. As I said in Ottawa when I first read his resume, I wondered why he couldn't hold a job. [Laughter] Now as Prime Minister, he seems to be doing impressively well at that, leading his nation's remarkable economic success: his deficit down to balance this year, the lowest interest rates in four decades, growth rates near the top of those of the industrialized nations. 
Under his leadership, relations between our two nations are stronger and better than ever. Of course, close neighbors sometimes disagree. Family members sometimes disagree. But united by democratic values and our long border and rich friendship, we've always found a way to work through those disagreements with patience and mutual respect, even back in the War of 1812 when, as Ambassador Chretien admitted tonight when I showed him the burn marks that are still on the White House from that war, our people were officially on opposite sides. Nonetheless, the residents of St. Stephen, New Brunswick, actually lent gunpowder to their neighbors across the river in Calais, Maine, so they could celebrate the Fourth of July. 
Our relationship works. We measure its merit in the difference it makes in the daily lives of Americans and Canadians. Today we've worked to strengthen our law enforcement cooperation to protect our most vulnerable citizens. We've taken new action to protect our environment and the environment especially of the Great Lakes our two nations are blessed to share. 
We've made it even simpler to cross the borders so neighbors can visit each other with greater ease and traffic jams become a thing of the past. We've set our sights on new horizons in space. I thank the people of Canada for providing the special purpose dexterous manipulator, otherwise known as the Canada Hand—[laughter]—for the international space station. This 11-foot machine is so precise, it can pick up an egg without breaking it. And now, Mr. Prime Minister, if you could supply us sometime in the very near future a "Canada knee," I for one would be very grateful. [Laughter] 
The Canada Hand is practical, sophisticated, smart, and strong. Therefore, it is a fitting symbol of the helping hand the people of Canada have always extended to the world. From the days you helped runaway slaves to freedom to the battles we've fought together in Europe, Korea, and the Persian Gulf in this century, to the hope your sons and daughters represent to the people of Bosnia and Haiti, Canada stands for the best of humanity. And every day, Canada leads by example. 
Prime Minister and Mrs. Chretien, we are proud to honor the great and good partnership between our nations. And let me also say on a personal note, I thank you for your friendship to Hillary and me, and we applaud your own remarkable partnership as you celebrate your 40th wedding anniversary this year. 
To you both, to your nation, to the people of Canada, long live our mutual friendship. Vive la Canada. I ask you to join me in a toast to the Prime Minister and Mrs. Chretien


Remarks Following the Entertainment at the State Dinner Honoring Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada
April 8, 1997

Let me say to all of you, first, I have wanted Denyce to sing here for a very long time, and I have patiently waited for the chance to get all this worked out. And I heard her sing not very long ago at the annual prayer breakfast here in Washington. And I came home, and I said, "I'm impatient. I'm tired of this. I want this woman at the Canadian state dinner." [Laughter] I don't know whether she had to cancel something else to be here tonight or not. 
Now, let me again say to Jean and Aline and to all the Canadians who are here, we're delighted to have you. There will be music and dancing in the hall for those of you who are capable. [Laughter] And the rest of us will creep off into the sunset. [Laughter] But you may stay as long as you like.


Interview With Jacobo Goldstein of CNN Radio Noticias
May 1, 1997

The President. I believe a majority do. I am, frankly, disappointed and surprised that there is still so much opposition to expanding fasttrack. NAFTA has been a big success for us, with Canada and with Mexico. It has helped the Mexican economy to grow. It has brought our two countries closer together. When Mexico had a difficult time economically, the United States made the loan that—I made the decision to make a loan to Mexico, and they paid the loan back early with interest and a profit. And it's working well. It's creating more jobs for Mexico, more jobs for the United States


Remarks Prior to Discussions With NATO Secretary General Javier Solana and an Exchange With Reporters
May 19, 1997

President Clinton. Well, it's a question of what you believe. I believe that we have had a long cold war and two world wars in the 20th century and a 19th century full of heartache and bloodshed because people were arguing over territory in Europe. And we now have a chance to create a European Continent where nation-states, for the first time, say they're going to respect each other's borders and work together on common security problems, as we are all doing together in Bosnia. And it seems to me, to find a framework which accomplishes that and which also keeps the United States and, I might add, Canada tied to the security and the freedom and the territorial integrity of Europe is an extraordinary achievement and gives us a chance to write a whole new chapter in the 21st century different from the one we have just written


Remarks at the Signing Ceremony for the NATO-Russia Founding Act in Paris, France
May 27, 1997

I know that some still see NATO through the prism of the cold war and that especially in NATO's decision to open its doors to Central Europe's new democracies, they see a Europe still divided, only differently divided. But I ask them to look again, for this new NATO will work with Russia, not against it. And by reducing rivalry and fear, by strengthening peace and cooperation, by facing common threats to the security of all democracies, NATO will promote greater stability in all of Europe, including Russia. And in turn, that will increase the security of Europe's North American partners—the United States and Canada—as well.


Remarks at a Ceremony Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Marshall Plan in The Hague
May 28, 1997

Again let me say America salutes the European Union's commitment to expand to Central and Eastern Europe. We support this historic process and believe it should move ahead swiftly. A more prosperous Europe will be a stronger Europe and also a stronger partner for Europe's North American friends in America and Canada




