US versus Cuba
Dec 2, 1989 to January 1, 1990 – May 31, 1990



Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters in Malta
December 3, 1989

The President. I don't know if we advanced it, but I was very, very clear in telling him how strongly I feel about that. And it did build on what Jim Baker had talked to Shevardnadze about out in Wyoming. So, there is no doubt in their minds that their assistance to Cuba and their lip service for the Sandinistas give us a considerable amount of difference with them. So, it's very clear -- well, until we see a free Cuba, self-determination and the people deciding what they want, Cuba will stick out until that date as a tiny country that's swimming against Mr. Gorbachev's own tide. And I made that point to him.


The President's News Conference in Brussels
December 4, 1989

It wasn't all sweetness and light. I had a very good opportunity to tell him how we view the problems in our own hemisphere: the sending of arms in there to help the FMLN [Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front] and the unhelpful role that Cuba is playing. I recited in detail the Oscar Arias [President of Costa Rica] phone call to me: "Please raise with Mr. Gorbachev the destructive role of Cuba."


Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner for Senator Phil Gramm in Houston, Texas
December 7, 1989

Now, tensions have been reduced. But there was one area where we differed, one area where I had to speak firmly and frankly, and that was on Central America. There can be no misunderstanding here. Whatever the Sandinistas have told the Soviet Union, we know for fact-certain that arms are going from Nicaragua into El Salvador. And we also know that Fidel Castro continues to export revolution not just into El Salvador but into other countries as well. Such activities in Nicaragua and Cuba weigh heavily on U.S.-Soviet relations. And we want to be the first hemisphere -- our hemisphere -- free of that burden. We want this to be the first hemisphere made up of entirely free, democratic countries


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Newspaper Editors
December 11, 1989

The President. Well, I expressed the views of the United States Government at the Malta meeting that I was concerned about their actions in Central America, and so I think the Vice President was reiterating a view that he knew I held. I'd liketothink there would be some change in their philosophy there. I had a phone call that I told Mr. Gorbachev about from Oscar Arias [President of Costa Rica] in which Arias simply asked me to raise with Gorbachev the question of Soviet support for Cuba -- Arias putting a lot of blame on Cuba for the export of revolution into these fragile democracies in Central America and, indeed, in South America. So, I raised the question very forcefully, and I hope that the Soviet Union got the message that it is impossible to have totally smooth relations with us as long as they are supporting the export of revolution into these democratically elected countries. So, there's no difference between myself and the Vice President on this matter. And he was reiterating, really, a position that I have taken


Remarks at the Catholic University of America Anniversary Dinner
December 12, 1989

I told Mr. Gorbachev of a phone call that I received from President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica -- Oscar Arias, Nobel Prize winner -- asking me to raise with Mr. Gorbachev the concern of the Central American democracies and the South American democracies about Cuba's export of revolution. And I did this, and I hope it made an impression on Mr. Gorbachev. In this country, we speak different languages, attend different places of worship, but human dignity somehow eclipsed this nation, as does "love thy neighbor." For the Golden Rule remains the most ennobling rule for our future and the world


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Denis Sassou-Nguesso of the Congo
February 12, 1990
In the 3 years since your last visit, southern Africa has seen significant progress towards peace and stability. Namibia is on the verge of independence. And in Angola, Cuban troops have begun the process of leaving. And while our support for the UNITA [National Union For the Total Independence of Angola] freedom fighters continues undiminished, we continue to hope for a negotiated settlement to that tragic war. Nelson Mandela's release from prison yesterday, which we've waited for and worked toward for so long, is another important sign that South Africa may soon begin negotiating a democratic, nonracial society and at last be on the way to ending apartheid once and for all
Remarks at a Presentation Ceremony for the Panama Campaign Streamer at Fort Myer, Virginia
March 8, 1990
Panama was another chapter in a great epic, an act of free men and women in the Revolution of '89 -- a revolution that also swept the East and that is now sweeping the globe. Because of Panamanians whose yearning for freedom is so strong that they will brave beatings to go to the polls, because of young Americans whose commitment to freedom is so strong that they will brave death to fight for it -- it is because of them that the day of the dictator truly is over. And the revolution continues. The people have spoken in Nicaragua. When they speak in Cuba and Haiti, our Western Hemisphere will be entirely within the compass of freedom. And when that day comes, it will be the ultimate tribute to those who have protected our freedom so well for so long
Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a White House Briefing for the Board of Directors of the National Newspaper Association
March 15, 1990
And I'll give you an example. In Jamaica, I must confess that when Mr. Manley [Prime Minister] came in, based on his past record and his proximity to Cuba and his former fraternity with Mr. Castro [President of Cuba], I didn't know how it would go. Manley campaigned on a different policy this time. He said, "I'm not going to push our country into the arms of Fidel Castro." And he's been very good, and I salute him. And when I go to try to help the impoverished people of Jamaica, we have very little flexibility. 
Remarks on Economic Assistance for Nicaragua and Panama and an Exchange With Reporters
March 20, 1990
The President. What I wanted to say is that what I want to talk about today is Panama and Nicaragua. The changes there are dramatic in terms of democracy. Yesterday I was asked about Cuba, and of course, I'm terribly disappointed that Castro seems to be firming up his totalitarian position instead of moving towards the free and fair elections -- what I think all of us here would like to see. I'd like to see him shift from that highly militarized island and let democracy have a chance. 
But I think if we are helpful to Nicaragua and Panama, it will simply increase the pressure in that marvelous island of Cuba for change. And so, this is what I'd like to talk about today. And I know that the Senate and House are going to come to grips with this problem. But this is the agenda, and then anything else that's on you all's mind
The President's News Conference
March 23, 1990
The President. Well, your question implies that Castro will be gone, but clearly the United States would rejoice in being able to help a democratically elected government in Cuba. I am convinced that the people of Cuba want the same thing that the people of Nicaragua demonstrated that they wanted, the people of Panama demonstrated that they wanted, and the rest of the countries in the hemisphere have demonstrated that they want: democracy and freedom. 
And Castro has not changed. Indeed, he's swimming against the tide. And I don't believe there would be any resistance from any quarter to helping the people of Cuba once they had theright to express themselves in free and fair elections. 
I don't think it will do much good, but I would encourage Castro to move toward free and fair elections. I would encourage him to lighten up on the question of human rights, where he's been unwilling to even welcome the U.N. back to take a look again. And I am not going to change the policy of the United States Government towards Mr. Castro. We're going to continue to try to bring the truth to Cuba, just as we did to Czechoslovakia and Poland and other countries
Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Association of Broadcasters in Atlanta, Georgia
April 2, 1990
And it's moments like that that convince me of one sure thing: I am determined that America will continue to bear witness to the truth. America must never lose its voice. Just as President Havel and others who were once under Communist domination have thanked us, I am convinced that the people of Cuba will thank us when they, too, win the liberty they yearn for
Remarks at a Republican Party Fundraising Dinner in Orlando, Florida
April 20, 1990
We all remember there was once a militant regime in Managua, but then came that election. Now the people are about to begin to rule in Nicaragua, just next week when Violeta Chamorro takes office. And of course, there is one last hardline holdout in the West -- only one: Cuba. But I believe that, like its neighbors in every direction, Cuba, too, will join the ranks of free nations, making this the first totally democratic hemisphere in history. It may not happen tomorrow. It may not happen next week or next month. But it will happen. The people of Cuba will be free. I will guarantee you that
Remarks to the Council of the Americas
May 22, 1990
In all of Latin America, only Cuba remains -- Castro's island -- isolated, totally out of step with the democratic tide. But today we're celebrating the anniversary of Cuban independence. And let me say with certainty that even in Cuba the dream of democracy can only be pushed back a little, only deferred; it will never be destroyed.
