MID 5101, US v China, 1 aug to 31-Aug-50 to 27-Jul-53


230 - The President's News Conference
August 31, 1950

THE PRESIDENT. I hope that there is no great danger that Red China will become involved in this United Nations approach to establishing peace in Korea. 
THE PRESIDENT. The Formosan situation as set out in my various messages is one for settlement--in the Japanese peace treaty with the allies who fought in the Japanese war and with those occupation forces--by those nations that have occupying forces in Japan now. Of course, it will not be necessary to keep the 7th Fleet in the Formosa Strait if the Korean thing is settled. That is a flank protection on our part for the United Nations forces



232 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Situation in Korea.
September 1, 1950

Fourth: We hope in particular that the people of China will not be misled or forced into fighting against the United Nations and against the American people, who have always been and still are their friends. Only the Communist imperialism, which has already started to dismember China, could gain from China's involvement in the war. The Communist imperialists are the only ones who can gain if China moves into this fight. 
Fifth: We do not want Formosa or any part of Asia for ourselves. We believe that the future of Formosa, like that of every other territory in dispute, should be settled peacefully. We believe that it should be settled by international action, and not by the decision of the United States or any other state alone. The mission of the 7th Fleet is to keep Formosa out of the conflict. Our purpose is peace, not conquest




270 - The President's News Conference
October 19, 1950

THE PRESIDENT. He wanted to know if we discussed the admission of Red China to the United Nations, and I said I did not discuss that



273 - The President's News Conference
October 26, 1950

THE PRESIDENT. I wonder where he got his information? I believe he must have gotten that from Gabrielson.3 He didn't get it from me.



287 - The President's News Conference
November 16, 1950

I have a statement here that I want to read to you. Mr. Ross tells me that you have asked him several questions about Chinese Communist intervention in Korea.1 I thought I would set it out here so that you would understand it. I hope you can understand it. And copies, of course, will be available for you when the conference is over. 
 [Reading] "The Security Council has before it a resolution concerning the grave situation caused by the Chinese Communist intervention in Korea. This resolution, introduced by the representatives of Cuba, Ecuador, France, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the United States, reaffirms that it is the policy of the United Nations to hold the Chinese frontier inviolate, to protect fully legitimate Korean and Chinese interests in the frontier zone, and to withdraw the United Nations forces from Korea as soon as stability has been restored and a unified, independent, and democratic government established throughout Korea. 
"This resolution further calls upon all states and authorities to withdraw immediately from Korea all individuals or units which are assisting the North Korean forces. I am sure that all members of the Security Council genuinely interested in restoring peace in the Far East will not only support this resolution but also use their influence to obtain compliance with it. 
"The United Nations forces now are being attacked from the safety of a privileged sanctuary. Planes operating from bases in China cross over into Korea to attack United Nations ground and air forces, and then flee back across the border. The Chinese Communist and North Korean Communist forces are being reinforced, supplied, and equipped from bases behind the safety of the Sino-Korean border. 
"The pretext which the Chinese Communists advance for taking offensive action against United Nations forces in Korea from behind the protection afforded by the Sino-Korean border is their professed belief that these forces intend to carry hostilities across the frontier into Chinese territory. 
"The resolutions and every other action taken by the United Nations demonstrates beyond any doubt that no such intention has ever been entertained. On the contrary, it has been repeatedly stated that it is the intention of the United Nations to localize the conflict and to withdraw its forces from Korea as soon as the situation permits. Speaking for the United States Government and people, I can give assurance that we support and are acting within the limits of United Nations policy in Korea, and that we have never at any time entertained any intention to carry hostilities into China. So far as the United States is concerned, I wish to state unequivocally that because of our deep devotion to the cause of world peace and our long-standing friendship for the people of China we will take every honorable step to prevent any extension of the hostilities in the Far East. If the Chinese Communist authorities or people believe otherwise, it can only be because they are being deceived by those whose advantage it is to prolong and extend hostilities in the Far East against the interests of all Far Eastern people. 
"Let it be understood, however, that the desire for peace, in order to be effective, must be shared by all concerned. If the Chinese Communists share the desire of the United Nations for peace and security in the Far East, they will not take upon themselves the responsibility for obstructing the objectives of the United Nations in Korea." 
THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on it. I saw that admission, but I do not want to comment on it now
THE PRESIDENT. The statement speaks for itself. You read it carefully, and I think you will find out just exactly what it means





295 - The President's News Conference
November 30, 1950

[Reading] "Recent developments in Korea confront the world with a serious crisis. The Chinese Communist leaders have sent their troops from Manchuria to launch a strong and well-organized attack against the United Nations forces in North Korea. This has been done despite prolonged and earnest efforts to bring home to the Communist leaders of China the plain fact that neither the United Nations nor the United States has any aggressive intentions toward China. Because of the historic friendship between the people of the United States and China, it is particularly shocking to us to think that Chinese are being forced into battle against our troops in the United Nations command. 
"The Chinese attack was made in great force, and it still continues. It has resulted in the forced withdrawal of large parts of the United Nations command. The battlefield situation is uncertain at this time. We may suffer reverses as we have suffered them before. But the forces of the United Nations have no intention of abandoning their mission in Korea." 
"If the United Nations yields to the forces of aggression, no nation will be safe or secure. If aggression is successful in Korea, we can expect it to spread throughout Asia and Europe to this hemisphere. We are fighting in Korea for our own national security and survival. 
"We have committed ourselves to the cause of a just and peaceful world order through the United Nations. We stand by that commitment. 
"We shall meet the new situation in three ways. 
"We shall continue to work in the United Nations for concerted action to halt this aggression in Korea. 
"We shall intensify our efforts to help other free nations strengthen their defenses in order to meet the threat of aggression elsewhere. 
"We shall rapidly increase our own military strength. 
"In the United Nations, the first step is action by the Security Council to halt this aggression. And Ambassador Warren Austin is pressing for such action. We shall exert every effort to help bring the full influence of the United Nations to bear on the situation in Korea. 
"Some had hoped that the normal peaceful process of discussion and negotiation, which is provided through the United Nations, could be successfully entered into with the present Chinese Communist delegation at Lake Success. There is, however, no indication that the representatives of Communist China are willing to engage in this process. Instead of discussing the real issues, they have been making violent and wholly false statements of the type which have often been used by the Soviet representatives in an effort to prevent the Security Council from acting. 
"We hope that the Chinese people will not continue to be forced or deceived into serving the ends of Russian colonial policy in Asia. 
"I am certain that, if the Chinese people now under the control of the Communists were free to speak for themselves, they would denounce this aggression against the United Nations. 
"Because this new act of aggression in Korea is only a part of a worldwide pattern of danger to all the free nations of the world, it is more necessary than ever before for us to increase at a very rapid rate the combined military strength of the free nations. It is more necessary than ever that integrated forces in Europe under a supreme command be established at once. 
THE PRESIDENT. We are still working on the thing from every angle. The best thing that can be done is to increase our defenses to a point where we can talk--as we should always talk--with authority

THE PRESIDENT. No, it doesn't mean that at all. The action against Communist China depends on the action of the United Nations. The military commander in the field will have charge of the use of the weapons, as he always has



299 - Address Before the Midcentury White House Conference on Children and Youth.
December 5, 1950

Our thoughts and prayers are with our young men who are fighting in Korea. They are engaged in a battle against tremendous odds. The full effort of the united people of this country is behind them. All of us are aware of the grave risk of general conflict which has been deliberately caused by the Chinese Communist leaders. Their action greatly changes the immediate situation with which we are confronted. It does not change our fundamental purpose to work for the cause of a just and peaceful world



303 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the National Emergency.
December 15, 1950

Then, in November, the Communists threw their Chinese armies into the battle against the free nations. 
By this act they have shown that they are now willing to push the world to the brink of a general war to get what they want. This is the real meaning of the events that have been taking place in Korea. 
That is why we are in such grave danger. 
The future of civilization depends on what we do-on what we do now, and in the months ahead
We do not yet know whether the Chinese Communists are willing to enter into honest negotiations to settle the conflict in Korea. If negotiations are possible, we shall strive for a settlement that will make Korea a united, independent, and democratic country. That is what the Korean people want, and that is what the United Nations has decided they are entitled to have





318 - The President's News Conference
December 28, 1950

THE PRESIDENT. I can't comment on that at this time. I'm sorry



2 - The President's News Conference
January 4, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I have that--do not have that under consideration

THE PRESIDENT. That is correct. 
THE PRESIDENT. We are always hopeful for negotiations to settle the difficulty




4 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 8, 1951

If their efforts are successful, they foment a revolution, as they did in Czechoslovakia and China, and as they tried, unsuccessfully, to do in Greece. If their methods of subversion are blocked, and if they think they can get away with outright warfare, they resort to external aggression. This is what they did when they loosed the armies of their puppet states against the Republic of Korea, in an evil war by proxy

Our country has always stood for freedom for the peoples of Asia. Long, long ago it stood for the freedom of the peoples of Asia. Our history shows this. We have demonstrated it in the Philippines. We have demonstrated it in our relations with Indonesia, India, and with China. We hope to join in restoring the people of Japan to membership in the community of free nations




7 - The President's News Conference
January 11, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. You are talking about bribery now, and I don't have anything to do with that. I don't believe in it. That's what ruined the Chiang Kai-shek government, just that sort of procedure



16 - The President's News Conference
January 18, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. Dean Acheson commented on that completely yesterday, with my entire approval. He covered it thoroughly and completely, after consultation with the President. Be sure and make that plain

THE PRESIDENT. Of course. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Of course--with everything we can bring to bear. 6 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't answer you on that--
THE PRESIDENT. --and I can't comment on it. 




22 - The President's News Conference
January 25, 1951

1.] [Reading] "Ambassador Austin 1 has fully and forcefully presented the views of this Government on our attitude toward aggression by the Chinese Communists. These views have the solid support of the Executive, the Congress, and the people of the United States. 
"Each member of the United Nations must make its own decision on this issue. For my part, I believe in calling an aggressor an aggressor. The question of what can and should be done about the aggression in Korea, of course, must be discussed with all other friendly nations. 
"Obviously this is no time for rash or unwise action. This is a time for clear thinking and firmness. 
"Let me stress again that the American resolution contains--as all our proposals have contained--a method for bringing about a cease-fire, and opening the way for peaceful settlement of outstanding issues." 




41 - Remarks at a Masonic Breakfast.
February 21, 1951

It is a tremendous outlook that we have for the future of the world as a whole, if we can develop the undeveloped parts of the world to meet the pressure of populations in countries like China and India and central Europe



50 - Remarks to the Winners of the 10th Annual Science Talent Search.
March 1, 1951

I was over at Aberdeen the other day, looking at tanks and weapons and guided missiles and all the other things which you hear about. And when I got through I didn't then have any feeling of mystery about why the Chinese have not been able to push us out of Korea, because we have better equipment and better weapons



63 - The President's News Conference
March 29, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. It has, and we are looking into it



70 - The President's News Conference
April 5, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on Speaker Rayburn's statement, but the Speaker is a truthful man




78 - Radio Report to the American People on Korea and on U.S. Policy in the Far East.
April 11, 1951

The whole Communist imperialism is back of the attack on peace in the Far East. It was the Soviet Union that trained and equipped the North Koreans for aggression. The Chinese Communists massed 44 well-trained and well-equipped divisions on the Korean frontier. These were the troops they threw into battle when the North Korean Communists were beaten

But you may ask why can't we take other steps to punish the aggressor. Why don't we bomb Manchuria and China itself? Why don't we assist the Chinese Nationalist troops to land on the mainland of China ? 
If we were to do these things we would be running a very grave risk of starting a general war. If that were to happen, we would have brought about the exact situation we are trying to prevent. 
If we were to do these things, we would become entangled in a vast conflict on the continent of Asia and our task would become immeasurably more difficult all over the world. 
What would suit the ambitions of the Kremlin better than for our military forces to be committed to a full-scale war with Red China? 
It may well be that, in spite of our best efforts, the Communists may spread the war. But it would be wrong--tragically wrong-for us to take the initiative in extending the war. 
The dangers are great. Make no mistake about it. Behind the North Koreans and Chinese Communists in the front lines stand additional millions of Chinese soldiers. And behind the Chinese stand the tanks, the planes, the submarines, the soldiers, and the scheming rulers of the Soviet Union. 
Our aim is to avoid the spread of the conflict. 
The course we have been following is the one best calculated to avoid an all-out war. It is the course consistent with our obligation to do all we can to maintain international peace and security. Our experience in Greece and Berlin shows that it is the most effective course of action we can follow. 
First of all, it is clear that our efforts in Korea can blunt the will of the Chinese Communists to continue the struggle. The United Nations forces have put up a tremendous fight in Korea and have inflicted very heavy casualties on the enemy. Our forces are stronger now than they have been before. These are plain facts which may discourage the Chinese Communists from continuing their attack.




80 - Address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner.
April 14, 1951

If the Communist leaders have learned the lesson that aggression will not be tolerated by the free nations of the world, it should be possible to reach a peaceful settlement in Korea. But it must be settled on a basis that will protect the objectives for which the United Nations are fighting. 
To reach such a settlement the Soviet and Chinese Communist leaders must abandon their aggression. 
On that point there can be no compromise. 
We will not engage in appeasement. 
We will make no deals that would reward aggression
They want us to get out of Korea--but they urge us to wage an aggressive war against China. Now, beat that one, if you can! 
They say it will provoke Russia to attack if we send troops to Europe--but they are sure Russia won't be provoked if we carry the war to China. It has been categorically stated that Russia will not come in if we bomb Manchuria. The statement was made to me about the Chinese not coming into Korea, and it was made on good authority, too, and I believed it




95 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I think everybody was not exactly surprised; they were sorry to see it happen





96 - Address at a Dinner of the Civil Defense Conference.
May 7, 1951

The firm stand of the United Nations in Korea has checked the advance of the Communist imperialism throughout Asia. It is using up the military resources of the Chinese Communists to such an extent that they are not able to carry out the designs of Communist imperialism against the independence of other Asian countries. And the people of those countries who have been resisting Communist aggression have now been given new hope and new courage

The Chinese rulers are losing large numbers of their soldiers. As these losses increase, it will become clearer and clearer to them that aggression does not pay. They can have peace when they give up their aggression and stop the fighting



107 - Address at the National Conference on Citizenship.
May 17, 1951

The suggestion was made by one Senator the other day, that we ought to cut down the goal for our Armed Forces by half a million men. And this same Senator wants to go for an all-out war in China all by ourselves. At a time like this, such a cut would be foolish--not only foolish it would be most dangerous



108 - The President's News Conference
May 17, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. My mind was made up at the time of the ultimatum to the Chinese Communist commander

THE PRESIDENT. I said my mind was made up when the ultimatum was sent by General MacArthur to the Chinese commander

THE PRESIDENT. I can't comment on that now




109 - Remarks at the Armed Forces Day Dinner.
May 18, 1951

When the North Koreans and Chinese began their aggressive attacks and marched into South Korea, a republic which had been set up by the United Nations and under their aegis, it was necessary that the peace-loving nations of the world enforce that peace, and stop the aggression



135 - Address at the Dedication of the National Institutes of Health Clinical Center.
June 22, 1951

Public health research workers right here at Bethesda developed a vaccine against typhus. Their vaccine has kept our forces in Korea free from typhus, while the North Korean and Chinese Communists have suffered seriously from that disease



144 - Address at the Ceremonies Commemorating the 175th Anniversary of the Declaration of Independence.
July 4, 1951

It is much the same with Korea. We are not fighting there to conquer China, or to destroy the Soviet Empire. We are fighting for a simple aim--as important to us today as the goal of independence was in 1776-the aim of securing theright of nations to be free and to live in peace



174 - Address in Detroit at the Celebration of the City's 250th Anniversary.
July 28, 1951

In the Far East the situation is much the same. The North Koreans and the Chinese Communists--so-called volunteers--are getting a steady flow of new equipment from the Soviet Union for ground and air use



213 - Radio Address Opening the Defense Bond Drive.
September 3, 1951

When aggression came in Korea, the United Nations took action. It labeled the aggression for what it was, it branded the North Korean and the Chinese Communists as the aggressors. It called upon peace-loving countries to unite and put down aggression




295 - The President's News Conference at Key West
November 15, 1951

THE PRESIDENT. I think it is a horrible thing. I have no official facts on the subject as yet, but I suppose they will come up to me eventually. But I think it is a horrible thing. It's the most uncivilized thing that has happened in the last century, if it's true



5 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 9, 1952

In Korea the forces of the United Nations turned hack the Chinese Communist invasion-and did it without widening the area of conflict. The action of the United Nations in Korea has been a powerful deterrent to a third world war. However, the situation in Korea remains very hazardous. The outcome of the armistice negotiation still remains uncertain



54 - Address Broadcast from the Voice of America floating Radio Transmitter Courier.
March 4, 1952

for almost two centuries the people of the United States have lived at peace with the peoples of Russia and China and other countries whose rulers are now assailing us. Only a decade ago, when the peoples of Russia and China were suffering under two of the most savage invasions in history, we came to their aid. We helped them to save their countries. 
I want to say to these people today, as we said then: We are your friends. There are no differences between us that cannot be settled if your rulers will turn from their senseless policy of hate and terror, and follow the principles of peace. 
Today the aggressive policies of your rulers are forcing us to arm to defend ourselves. But we cannot find it in our hearts to hate anyone. We cannot find it in our hearts to bear any hate against you. We know that you are suffering under oppression and persecution. We know that if you were free to say what you really believe, you would join with us to banish the fear of war, and bring peace on earth and good will towards all men




57 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on the Mutual Security Program.
March 6, 1952

Now let us look for a minute at India. Since the shadow of Communist control has darkened China, India stands as the largest democratic nation in all Asia. But India is faced with the same kind of threat which overpowered the Chinese. We have a chance to help stop that threat in India. Not by sending guns and planes, but by doing just the kind of thing I've been telling you about



69 - Address at the Jefferson-Jackson Day Dinner.
March 29, 1952

That's the record, and how do the Republicans propose to get around it? Here's what they will try to do. They will go to the voters and say, "Did you know the Government was full of Communists?" And the voters say, "No. What makes you say that?" And then the Republicans explain that somebody named Joe Doakes works for the Government, and he has a cousin who sells shoelaces, or a ribbon clerk in a department store, and this cousin has a wife who wrote an article, before Joe married her, that was printed in a magazine that also printed an article in favor of Chinese Communists-and they will continue that ad lib. This may sound very silly, and it is. But some political fakers spend all their time trying to pull the wool over the people's eyes with this sort of nonsense



82 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on the Need for Government Operation of the Steel Mills.
April 8, 1952

I have to think about our soldiers in Korea, facing the Chinese Communists, and about our soldiers and allies in Europe, confronted by the military power massed behind the Iron Curtain. I have to think of the danger to our security if we are forced, for lack of steel, to cut down on our atomic energy program



144 - Address at a Dinner of the Jewish National fund.
May 26, 1952

We agreed to help in this program. This year our share was to be about $100 million, but under the bill the House passed last Friday, we probably would not be able to do more than $25 million worth of help. And the people who led the fight--now listen to this, this is good, for these meat axe cuts in Asia are the very same people who howl the loudest about losing China to the Communists-now I wonder, do they want to save India from the fate of China, or would they rather let India be gobbled up by the Communists too, so they can have another calamity to blame on the administration 



266 - Rear Platform and Other Informal Remarks in Minnesota, North Dakota, and Montana.
September 29, 1952

Now these things have been possible in spite of the Old Guard Republicans in the Congress, and not because of them. Their record in Congress shows you where they stand, and what they have done. They haven't helped build prosperity--a lot of them are still voting against the farm programs, against power, against reclamation, against conservation. They have been against every measure that has built up the West. They haven't helped the defense effort. A lot of them have fought against price controls, time after time--and rent controls, and defense housing. They have tried to get tax relief for the rich and all kinds of special benefits for every special interest. Those Old Guard Republicans haven't helped much in Korea, either. Most of them have voted against military aid and economic aid to Korea before the invasion. That is what gave the Communists their signal to advance. Then, later on, they tried to start an all-out war with China. Of course, they were backing a different general then. When he got here, though, they didn't think so much of him as before



295 - Rear Platform and Other Informal Remarks in New Hampshire and Massachusetts.
October 17, 1952

Today, the South Koreans are facing not only the North Koreans but the Chinese Communist armies. And behind those Communist armies are the vast supplies, weapons of war, and skilled technicians of the Soviet Union itself. If we mean to hold Korea, if we mean to hold the line there against international aggression, there must be no loose talk now about pulling our soldiers out.



299 - Address at the City Hall in Providence, Rhode Island.
October 18, 1952

You remember what he said. He said we ought to pull our soldiers out of the fighting in Korea and let the South Korean army fight the Red Chinese hordes alone

Now, my friends, the Republican candidate for President also knows that as long as the Communists are throwing all they can into the fight, the South Koreans cannot stand up against the entire Chinese Red Army



305 - Address in Pottsville, Pennsylvania.
October 21, 1952

But then the Chinese Communists swarmed into Korea, General MacArthur began his retreat from the Yalu, and people got scared again. We had a second wave of buying, and prices rose. That was the inflationary wave we stopped with a general freeze of prices in January 1951



313 - Rear Platform and Other Informal Remarks in Minnesota.
October 28, 1952

On the other hand, if we had followed the advice of some of our generals, we would probably be involved in a much greater conflict. In the far East, one general almost got us into a much bigger war--against China and Russia--and I had to remove him

On the other hand, if we had followed the advice of some of our generals, we would have gotten ourselves involved in a large-scale war in China and Russia



316 - Address at the Hotel Sherman in Chicago.
October 29, 1952

The second way is to go on from Korea to a bigger war, attacking China and Russia, expanding the theater of conflict to include Japan, the Pacific, and possibly the whole world. We have also rejected that alternative



321 - Rear Platform Remarks in Indiana and Illinois.
November 1, 1952

This article goes on to say that all our men, and I quote--expressed "great admiration for the fighting capabilities of their Korean allies .... Nevertheless, all of the Americans questioned felt that the Koreans were not yet ready to assume full responsibility for holding the line against a tough and aggressive Chinese foe



345 - The President's News Conference
December 11, 1952

THE PRESIDENT. He said the Chinese would not come into Korea, that it would be possible to send a division of the regular Army to Germany for occupation purposes to relieve another division over there by the first of January.



354 - Address at the National War College.
December 19, 1952

Let no one think that this administration underestimates the effects of the Communist victory in China. We know that the capture of the great Chinese people by a clique of ruthless Communist fanatics was a tragic loss to the cause of peace and progress in Asia and elsewhere. We hope it will not be an irrevocable loss



6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
February 2, 1953

In June 1950, following the aggressive attack on the Republic of Korea, the United States Seventh Fleet was instructed both to prevent attack upon Formosa and also to insure that Formosa should not be used as a base of operations against the Chinese Communist mainland

This has meant, in effect, that the United States Navy was required to serve as a defensive arm of Communist China. Regardless of the situation in 1950, since the date of that order the Chinese Communists have invaded Korea to attack the United Nations forces there. They have consistently rejected the proposals of the United Nations Command for an armistice. They recently joined with Soviet Russia in rejecting the armistice proposal sponsored in the United Nations by the Government of India. This proposal had been accepted by the United States and 53 other nations. 
Consequently there is no longer any logic or sense in a condition that required the United States Navy to assume defensive responsibilities on behalf of the Chinese Communists, thus permitting those Communists, with greater impunity, to kill our soldiers and those of our United Nations allies in Korea. 
I am, therefore, issuing instructions that the Seventh Fleet no longer be employed to shield Communist China. This order implies no aggressive intent on our part. But we certainly have no obligation to protect a nation fighting us in Korea




12 - The President's News Conference
February 17, 1953

THE PRESIDENT. That has not been discussed with me except in the papers. There has been no study on it that has been brought up yet to me. So personally I am not--the answer is, I have no answer

Now I don't know about these statements that you talk about, but I have said this publicly time and again: in these matters affecting the broad policy of the United States, and not mere expedients within the proper purview of the responsibilities of a mere Commander in Chief, they will never be undertaken until they are discussed with the proper leaders of the Congress; and if necessary they will have to act on them. I don't believe in doing these things haphazardly and on an individual and arbitrary basis




41 - The President's News Conference
April 2, 1953

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Smith, it is very difficult to say that any speculation on this affair should be dignified with the term "analysis." You really are doing some pretty definite guessing. But I think in this whole business of the peace approach, in which the hearts of America are so deeply involved, that we should take at face value every offer that is made to us, until it is proved not to be worthy of being so taken. By that I do not mean that we ignore the history of the past and some of the frustrating experiences we have had in trying to promote peaceful arrangements with some of the people with whom we would now have to deal. But I do say, here is something that, when the proffer comes along, we should go right at it like it is meant exactly as it is said. 
Now, in the proposal made by the Chinese commanders in Korea, which was in response to a request made by General Clark in February, and in line with the recommendations that the United Nations side of the negotiators have repeated over and over again, it was stated that it was believed that the exchange of sick and wounded prisoners during hostilities would do much to promote negotiations for an armistice. 
We have, therefore, the hope that this exchange of sick and wounded prisoners will be quickly accomplished. Certainly, to my mind, that would be clear indication that deeds, rather than words and more frustrating conversations, are now to come into fashion--something that certainly every right-thinking person would welcome very heartily. 
Therefore, without speculating further as to the motivation lying behind this, I should just say this Government is prepared to meet every honest advance, and in this instance, for example, has been trying to arrange this for a long, long time




50 - Address "The Chance for Peace" Delivered Before the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
April 16, 1953

These proposals spring, without ulterior purpose or political passion, from our calm conviction that the hunger for peace is in the hearts of all peoples--those of Russia and of China no less than of our own country



77 - The President's News Conference
May 14, 1953

THE PRESIDENT. I do think that you must remember that different nations have different interpretations on what recognition of a nation means. I think, ever since Wilson's time, in this country, we have more or less gone on the theory that recognition means also tacit approval. Now, at one time, as you well know, recognition meant just the recognition of the fact that there was a de facto ruler of an important segment of the world. And I think in certain other countries, that viewpoint still holds. With us, because there has been a different meaning developed in our country of this word recognition of another, we have to view the case differently. And I do not consider it as big a rift, let us say, between British and American policy, as it might appear on the surface, that we don't reach the same conclusion on it. 
Certainly I would not say at this moment that I believe that admittance should follow an armistice




88 - The President's News Conference
May 28, 1953

THE PRESIDENT. Well, as of this moment, I say this: there has never been proposed to me, seriously, by anybody in Government, that we should allow them in the United Nations. I assume that you mean under the conditions and the circumstances of the world as they now exist, in what we call Red Communist China, believing as we do it is subservient to Moscow, whether it should be in it. I believe it should not. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Drummond, I really don't like answering questions, particularly hypothetical questions, before they arise. No one ever knows exactly the circumstances of proposals. You people used to ask me whether I would ever accept a nomination under such and such and such conditions, and I did not believe those conditions were going to arise. Now, right this moment, I don't believe the condition is going to arise on the question which you talk about. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I haven't read the papers this morning, I guess, as thoroughly as I should have. Then it is not theoretical, no, because it is at least obvious that someone in a responsible position is thinking in that direction. 
I would say this: they propose a very, very drastic sort of cure for something which I would consider a very grave error--now make no mistake there. But I don't know whether I could go along with that answer. I hope you would give me time to think that one over. That is getting pretty drastic, I think.



109 - The President's News Conference
June 17, 1953

There is one other point: the possibility of these latest attacks of the Communists delaying or interfering with the signing of an armistice. Frankly, ladies and gentlemen, I am not exactly certain what that effect will be, but I would like to call your attention to this one thing. Let us assume that the North Koreans and the Chinese Communists are definitely sincere in their desire for an armistice. Then, I believe, we cannot escape this implication of these attacks: their complete indifference to human life and to the individual, because what would be the purpose of these attacks if they are definitely sincere in wanting an armistice, attacks obviously designed for taking a hill here or a little portion of a position there, and willing to waste the human lives that are involved in such attacks? Those defensive lines are strong, and even little portions of them are taken only at terrific cost in lives

THE PRESIDENT. I can't talk about it very definitively, for this reason: he was absolutely correct when he said "we are considering." He was obviously taking you into his confidence, to show that these things are very weighty questions. As I said--I think it was probably in the talk I made to Congress early in this administration or it may have been in the April 16th talk--there is no such thing, as we see it, of a real Korean armistice that merely frees Chinese forces to do something else equally inimical to our interests. So you can't separate these things entirely. But how they will be expressed and where they will be handled is still a moot question, in my own mind
