MID 452701, Syria

Interview With the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation
April 18, 2005
The President. Well, there's a movement toward freedom around the world. And the Lebanese people have made it clear that they want to be free of Syrian influence; they want there to be free elections. And the United States of America stands squarely with the people of Lebanon. 
The President. No, I don't think so. I think people will see that the United States is consistent in working with the people so that they can have a free voice, and so they get to decide the Government. The people of Lebanon will decide who is in their Government, not the United States. But the United States can join with the rest of the world, like we've done, and say to Syria, "Get out—not only get out with your military forces, but get out with your intelligence services too. Get completely out of Lebanon, so Lebanon can be free and the people can be free." 
The President. I am pleased that they're beginning to get out. And we expect them to be completely out, and I mean not only the troops but the people that have had— that have been embedded in parts of Government, some of the intelligence services that have been embedded in Government and others. They need to get completely out of Lebanon so the people of Lebanon can decide the fate of the country, not another Government, not agents of another Government, but the people. 
The President. Well, Syria has heard from us before. We have made it very clear that—what we expect, in order to be able to have relations with us. First on the agenda, right now, there's two things immediately that come to mind. One is to stop supporting Ba'athists in Iraq, stop those people in Syria who are funneling money and helping smuggle people and arms into Iraq. They've heard that message directly from me. And secondly, of course, is to completely withdraw from Lebanon. Syria must shut down Hizballah offices. Hizballah not only is trying to destabilize the peace process between Israel and the Palestinians, but Hizballah, as you know, is a dangerous organization. 
The President. Well, they're in Syria too. And Syria has got to do its part about making sure that Hizballah doesn't receive support from Syria. 
The President. Well, I think the Government will feel the international pressure. We're just beginning. And obviously, diplomacy is the first course of action. And we hope—I think diplomacy will work. 
The President. Well, first of all, Syria and Israel have got current obligations. Syria has got a current obligation to get out of Lebanon. And again I'll repeat this, because I want it very clear what I mean by, "Get out of Lebanon." I mean not only troops but intelligence services as well. And we expect that to happen. Syria has also got to stop inciting or providing—allowing people in their country to incite violence against Iraqi citizens and our coalition troops. 

Remarks to the Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of America Legislative Conference
April 21, 2005
Think about what's happened in a quick period of time. Afghanistan is free. Millions of people voted for a President, in spite of the fact that only a short time before that, they were under the brutal control of the Taliban. Or in Ukraine, when people went to the streets to demand free and fair elections—or Kyrgyzstan or in Lebanon. By the way, our message is very clear to Syria: Take out all your troops; take out all your intelligence services; and give the good people of Lebanon a chance to have free and fair elections

The President's News Conference
April 28, 2005
We're working closely with the Russians on the issue of vehicle-mounted weaponry to Syria. We didn't appreciate that, but we made ourselves clear.
And I think the United Nations is important. As a matter of fact, I'll give you an example. Today I met with the United Nations representative to Syria, Mr. Larsen. He's an impressive fellow. Now, he's delivered—to Lebanon, excuse me—he's delivered a very strong message to the Syrian leader, though, that the world expects President Asad to withdraw not only his military forces but his intelligence services completely from Lebanon. And now he is in charge of following up to make sure it happens. 
I think that's a very important and useful role for the United Nations to play. We have played a role. France has played a role. A lot of nations have played roles. But the United Nations has done a very good job in Syria—with Syria, in Lebanon, of making sure that the world expects the Lebanese elections to be free in May, without Syrian influence. He's an impressive fellow. I applaud him for his hard work. But there's an example of why I think the United Nations is an important body. 

Interview With European Print Journalists
May 5, 2005
And I recognize it's—I didn't say, "End tyranny tomorrow"; I said, "End tyranny over time." And in my speeches that I talk about, I always say, "We need to work with friends to achieve—and I believe we can achieve those goals." But I'm also recognizing that—there's an issue, for example, in—the idealistic position was to work with the world, the United Nations, France, and the United States to get Syria out of Lebanon. But there's a consequence to that. There will be a vacuum. And now we've got to work, if we get Syria completely out—and I say "if" because we're able to measure troops; it's harder to measure intelligence services. But the statement is, "All out, not halfway out, not partially out, but all out"—and meaning it when you say it, by the way. 
But there's a consequence to that, and that consequence is, is that there will be a period of time when the Government, a new Government, is going to have to try to figure out how to make sure there's minority rights. There's a lot of religious groups. And there the world needs to help this new democracy—I say "new democracy," a democracy without Syrian influence that basically determined the course of action—to help that Government go forward. That's another role we should play. But if you didn't have an idealistic streak in you, you wouldn't be saying, "It's possible to achieve democracy in Lebanon." Yet I believe a democracy will be achieved in Lebanon, and I know it will serve as an important example in a neighborhood that is desperate for democracy. 
We've made it clear that—and by the way, Vladimir Putin went to Israel and got to explain his decision on Syrian missiles, which I thought was very interesting. And we made our position very clear on the AK-47s to Venezuela, and that is, is that we're concerned that those weapons could end up in the hands of FARC, for example, a very destabilizing force in South America.

The President's Radio Address
May 21, 2005
Terrorists know that there is no room for them as freedom takes root in the broader Middle East, so they are fighting to stop its progress. But in recent weeks, we have dealt them a series of devastating blows. In Afghanistan, we have brought to justice dozens of terrorists and insurgents. In Pakistan, one of Usama bin Laden's senior terrorist leaders, a man named al-Libbi, was brought to justice. In Iraq, we captured two deputies of the terrorist Zarqawi, and our forces have killed or captured hundreds of terrorists and insurgents near the Syrian border.

Commencement Address at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland
May 27, 2005
And we will stay on their trail. The best way to protect our citizens is to stay on the offensive. In the last few weeks, we've dealt the enemy a series of powerful blows. In Afghanistan, we brought to justice scores of terrorists and insurgents. In Pakistan, one of Usama Bin Laden's senior terrorist leaders, a man named al-Libbi, was brought to justice. In Iraq, we captured two senior operatives of the terrorist Zarqawi. And in recent days, our forces have killed or captured hundreds of terrorists and insurgents in Baghdad and western Iraq and near the Syrian border. Across the world, our military is standing directly between the American people and the worst dangers in the world, and Americans are grateful to have such brave defenders.

Remarks Following Discussions With President Roh Moo-hyun of South Korea and an Exchange With Reporters
June 10, 2005
President Bush. Well, I've been disturbed by reports I read in today's newspaper that said that Syrian intelligence officers might still be in Lebanon and might still be there. And our message—and it's not just the message of the United States; the United Nations has said the same thing—is that in order for Lebanon to be free, is for Syria to not only remove her military but to remove intelligence officers as well. And obviously, we're going to follow up on these troubling reports, and we expect the Syrian Government to follow up on these troubling reports

Remarks to Students From the Partnerships for Learning, Youth Exchange and Study
June 13, 2005
I really think you're part of an important program that is bringing students from Muslim countries to the United States. I think it's important, and I hope you think it's important too. I'm amazed by the number of countries represented amongst you all: Afghanistan, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Syria, Tunisia, Yemen, West Bank, Gaza, Arab communities in Israel. You represent a lot of countries and a lot of people. Here's what I think. I think your generation is going to help shape one of the most exciting periods of history in the broader Middle East and the world. It's a period of time when the hope of liberty is spreading to millions
I know there's a student here who went to Grayling High School in Michigan, Abdul Rahman. He's from Syria. He took on a special project. He decided—and I'm sure maybe some of you all did the same thing during the holy month of Ramadan— explained to students what that means. A lot of kids your age here in this country really aren't sure what Ramadan means, and it's important for them to understand what Ramadan means. And so Abdul— here's what he said. He said, "When I got to one of my classes on the first day of Ramadan, I was totally amazed. There were signs everywhere in the class saying ‘Happy Ramadan, Abdul.' Some students even tried to fast with me on the first day."

Address to the Nation on the War on Terror From Fort Bragg, North Carolina
June 28, 2005
Some of the violence you see in Iraq is being carried out by ruthless killers who are converging on Iraq to fight the advance of peace and freedom. Our military reports that we've killed or captured hundreds of foreign fighters in Iraq who have come from Saudi Arabia and Syria, Iran, Egypt, Sudan, Yemen, Libya, and others. They are making common cause with criminal elements, Iraqi insurgents, and remnants of Saddam Hussein's regime who want to restore the old order. They fight because they know that the survival of their hateful ideology is at stake. They know that as freedom takes root in Iraq, it will inspire millions across the Middle East to claim their liberty as well. And when the Middle East grows in democracy and prosperity and hope, the terrorists will lose their sponsors, lose their recruits, and lose their hopes for turning that region into a base for attacks on America and our allies around the world.




