MID 445501, North Korea

Exchange With Reporters in Crawford, Texas
December 31, 2002
The President. I view the North Korean situation as one that can be resolved peacefully, through diplomacy. The international community, particularly those countries close to North Korea, understand the stakes involved. I had a very good visit with President-elect Roh of South Korea. I've obviously talked to Jiang Zemin right here in Crawford about a nuclear-weapons-free Peninsula. 
There is strong consensus, not only amongst the nations in the neighborhood and our friends but also with international organizations such as the IAEA, that North Korea ought to comply with international regulations. I believe this can be done peacefully, through diplomacy, and we will continue to work that way. I take—all options, of course, are always on the table for any President, but by working with these countries, we can resolve this. 
The President. Well, Ron, I believe this is not a military showdown; this is a diplomatic showdown. And we can resolve this peacefully and intend—— 
The President. And intend to work to resolve it peacefully. We've got good progress in talking to our friends. And I look forward to the fact that President-elect Roh is sending some people over here, and then he, himself, will come after he's been inaugurated. 
And we will continue to work to resolve the situation on the Korean Peninsula in a peaceful way. And it was right here in Crawford, Texas, where I had a meaningful and good discussions with Jiang Zemin. Heck, it wasn't all that long ago that a U.S. leader never spoke to the Chinese leader. And right here in Crawford, we had a dialog where we both committed ourselves to working in a way to convince Kim Chong-il that it's not in his country's interests to arm up with nuclear weapons. And I believe that can be resolved peacefully.

Exchange With Reporters in Crawford
January 2, 2003
Another country is North Korea. And we are working with friends and allies in the region to explain clearly to North Korea it's not in their nation's interest to develop and proliferate weapons of mass destruction. It was right here at this spot where Jiang Zemin, the leader of China, and myself got together, and we put out a joint declaration that we expect for the Korean Peninsula to be nuclear-weapons-free. That was a serious statement. I believe the situation with North Korea will be resolved peacefully. As I said, it's a diplomatic issue, not a military issue, and we're working all fronts. 
The President. Well, what I worry about with a leader like Kim Chong-il is somebody who starves his people. The United States of America is the largest—one of the largest, if not the largest donor of food to the North Korean people. And one of the reasons why the people are starving is because the leader of North Korea hasn't seen to it that their economy is strong or that they be fed. We've got a great heart, but I have no heart for somebody who starves his folks. 
It's important for the American people to remember the history of Kim Chong-il. He created some international tension, and the United States of America went and signed an agreement with him. And the agreement was that we'd provide—along with others, we'd provide fuel oil and help, and in return, he would not enrich uranium. But it turns out he was enriching uranium. And we blew the whistle on the fact that he was in violation of the '94 agreement. And the parties to that agreement came together and said, "Well, in return for him making that decision, in terms of him abrogating the agreement, there will be a consequence." And that's where we stand right now. 
So the parties have come together. There has been a joint declaration of intent. And we will continue working to resolve the situation. 

Remarks to the Troops at Fort Hood, Texas
January 3, 2003
In the case of North Korea, the world must continue to speak with one voice, to turn that regime away from its nuclear ambitions.

Remarks Following a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
January 6, 2003
The President. I'll answer one on North Korea, yes, real quick. 
The President. Yes. 
The President. Well, first of all, I went to Korea and clearly said that the United States has no intention of invading North Korea. I said that right there in South Korea. And in Kim Chong-il's neighborhood, I spoke as clearly, as I said—and said, "We won't invade you." And I'll repeat that: We have no intention of invading North Korea. 
We expect North Korea to adhere to her obligations. She's in an agreement with the United States and said that she would not develop nuclear weapons, and we expect people to keep their word. We will have dialog; we've had dialog with North Korea. The Secretary of State visited with the Deputy Foreign Minister—— 
The President. ——the Foreign Minister, excuse me. And talking is one thing, but we expect people to honor obligations. And for Kim Chong-il to be a credible member of the world community, he's got to understand that he's got to do what he says he's going to do. 
I believe this will be resolved peacefully, and I believe it can be resolved diplomatically. 

Remarks to the Economic Club of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois
January 7, 2003
And we're dealing with North Korea as well. It's a regime that has expelled international inspectors and is attempting to defy the world through its nuclear weapons program. The United States and other nations will confront this threat as well. In this case, I believe that by working with countries in the region, diplomacy will work. We have no aggressive intent, no argument with the North Korean people. We're interested in peace on the Korean Peninsula.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Aleksander Kwasniewski of Poland and an Exchange With Reporters
January 14, 2003
President Bush. First of all, there's a big concern here in our country about North Korea, and I'm absolutely convinced this issue will be solved in a peaceful way. I want to remind the American people that prior to North Korea making the decision it made, that I had instructed our Secretary of State to approach North Korea about a bold initiative, an initiative which would talk about energy and food, because we care deeply about the suffering of the North Korean people. 
And then the North Koreans made a decision. And the decision they made was to ignore international norm, ignore treaties that they had—agreements that they had reached and start building potential nuclear weapons, enriching uranium. And now they have expelled—are in the process of kicking out IAEA* people. 
I view this as an opportunity to bind together nations in the neighborhood and around the world to make it clear to the North Koreans that we expect this issue to be resolved peacefully, and we expect them to disarm. We expect them not to develop nuclear weapons. And if they so choose to do so—their choice—then I will reconsider whether or not we will start the bold initiative that I talked to Secretary Powell about. 
People say, "Well, are you willing to talk to North Korea?" Of course we are. But what this Nation won't do is be blackmailed. And what this Nation will do is use this as an opportunity to bring the Chinese and the Russians and South Koreans and the Japanese to the table to solve this problem peacefully. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 28, 2003
On the Korean Peninsula, an oppressive regime rules a people living in fear and starvation. Throughout the 1990s, the United States relied on a negotiated framework to keep North Korea from gaining nuclear weapons. We now know that that regime was deceiving the world and developing those weapons all along. And today, the North Korean regime is using its nuclear program to incite fear and seek concessions. America and the world will not be blackmailed. 
America is working with the countries of the region, South Korea, Japan, China, and Russia, to find a peaceful solution and to show the North Korean Government that nuclear weapons will bring only isolation, economic stagnation, and continued hardship. The North Korean regime will find respect in the world and revival for its people only when it turns away from its nuclear ambitions

Remarks Prior to the Swearing-In Ceremony for John Snow as Secretary of the Treasury and an Exchange With Reporters
February 7, 2003
The President. All options are on the table, but I believe we can solve this diplomatically. I spoke to Jiang Zemin today about this very subject, and I will continue working diplomatically to convince Kim Chong-il that he will be further isolated if he continues to develop a nuclear program. 
I talked to the President of China, reminded him that we have a joint responsibility to uphold the goal that we talked about in Crawford—that goal being a nuclear-weapons-free Peninsula—that we have responsibilities, joint responsibilities, that Russia has a responsibility. I explained that to President Putin the other day when I spoke to him. 
We will continue—when I spoke to Prime Minister Koizumi recently, I talked about the North Korean issue. And we will continue to work diplomatically to make it very clear to Kim Chong-il that should he expect any kind of aid and help for his people, that he must comply with the world's demand that he not develop a nuclear weapon. 
The President. No, all options are on the table, of course. But as I said many times, and I still believe this, this will be solved diplomatically. And we will continue to work diplomatically. As I mentioned this morning, I did just that this morning with the President of China. 

The President's News Conference
March 6, 2003
The President. This is a regional issue. I say a regional issue because there's a lot of countries that have got a direct stake into whether or not North Korea has nuclear weapons. We've got a stake as to whether North Korea has a nuclear weapon. China clearly has a stake as to whether or not North Korea has a nuclear weapon. South Korea, of course, has a stake. Japan has got a significant stake as to whether or not North Korea has a nuclear weapon. Russia has a stake. 
So therefore, I think the best way to deal with this is in multilateral fashion, by convincing those nations that they must stand up to their responsibility, along with the United States, to convince Kim Chong-il that the development of a nuclear arsenal is not in his nation's interest and that should he want help in easing the suffering of the North Korean people, the best way to achieve that help is to not proceed forward. 
We've tried bilateral negotiations with North Korea. My predecessor, in a good-faith effort, entered into a framework agreement. The United States honored its side of the agreement; North Korea didn't. While we felt the agreement was in force, North Korea was enriching uranium. 
In my judgment, the best way to deal with North Korea is to convince parties to assume their responsibility. I was heartened by the fact that Jiang Zemin, when he came to Crawford, Texas, made it very clear to me, and publicly as well, that a nuclear-weapons-free peninsula was in China's interest. And so we're working with China and the other nations I mentioned to bring a multilateral pressure and to convince Kim Chong-il that the development of a nuclear arsenal is not in his interests. 
The President. Well, I think it's—yes, I think it's an issue. Obviously, I'm concerned about North Korea developing nuclear weapons, not only for their own use but for—perhaps they might choose to proliferate them, sell them. They may end up in the hands of dictators, people who are not afraid of using weapons of mass destruction, people who try to impose their will on the world or blackmail free nations. I'm concerned about it. 
We are working hard to bring a diplomatic solution. And we've made some progress. After all, the IAEA* asked that the Security Council take up the North Korean issue. It's now in the Security Council—constantly talking with the Chinese and the Russians and the Japanese and the South Koreans. Colin Powell just went overseas and spent some time in China, went to the inauguration of President Roh in South Korea, spent time in China. We're working the issue hard, and I'm optimistic that we'll come up with a diplomatic solution. I certainly hope so. 

Remarks on the Rescue of U.S. Prisoners of War and an Exchange With Reporters
April 13, 2003
The President. Well, John, I think that people have got to know that we are serious about stopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction and that each situation requires a different response. But we are making good progress in North Korea. We have made it clear that we think that the best way to deal with their proliferation is through a multinational forum. It looks like that might be coming to fruition. That's very good news for the people in the Far East who are concerned about North Korea and their willingness to develop nuclear weapons. We're making progress on all fronts.
The President. We will deal with each situation as it arises. We're making progress on the Korean Peninsula. Everybody knows our position, which is that we expect there to be a nuclear-weapons-free Peninsula. The good news is it's a position shared by the Chinese; it's a position shared by the South Koreans; and it's a position shared by the Japanese. So we've got common interests, and working together, I am very hopeful we'll be able to achieve those interests diplomatically.

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters at Fort Hood, Texas
April 20, 2003
The President. Well, the key thing on the North Korea agenda is that China is assuming a very important responsibility, and that is that they will confirm that which—work toward that which Jiang Zemin told me in Crawford, right around the corner here, that China's policy is for a nuclear-weapons-free Peninsula. And now that they're engaged in the process, it makes it more likely that's going to occur. You've got the United States adhering to that posture. You've got China adhering to that posture. South Korea believes that the Peninsula ought to be nuclear-weapons-free. Japan strongly believes that. And I believe that all four of us, working together, have a good chance of convincing North Korea to abandon her ambitions to develop nuclear arsenals

Interview With Tom Brokaw of NBC News
April 24, 2003
The President. Yes. See, they're back to the old blackmail game. One of our goals and objectives must be to strengthen the nonproliferation regimes and get the whole world focused on the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or the materials for weapons of mass destruction. And North Korea is making my case that we've got to come together. 
And we started that process in the North Korean Peninsula that is coming together. The Chinese now, for the first time, are partners at the table. I look forward to hearing what the Chinese say about being rebuffed by the North Koreans because they, too, believe that the Peninsula ought to be nuclear-weapons-free. This will give us an opportunity to say to the North Koreans and the world, we're not going to be threatened. On the other hand we, the world, must come together to make sure institutions like the IAEA are effective at stopping proliferation. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Roh Moo-hyun of South Korea
May 14, 2003
We of course discussed the need to have a nuclear-weapons-free Korean Peninsula. I assured the President we will continue to work to achieve a peaceful solution. We're making good progress toward achieving that peaceful resolution of the issue of the Korean Peninsula in regards to North Korea.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan in Crawford, Texas
May 23, 2003
On the threat from North Korea's nuclear program, the Prime Minister and I see the problem exactly the same way. We will not tolerate nuclear weapons in North Korea. We will not give into blackmail. We will not settle for anything less than the complete, verifiable, and irreversible elimination of North Korea's nuclear weapons program. 
We discussed the fact that China has started to play an important role in our efforts to address this challenge. At talks held in Beijing last month, China called on North Korea to renounce nuclear weapons and live up to its agreements. The Prime Minister and I agreed that we must broaden these talks to include Japan and South Korea and, at sometime later, perhaps others. We are confident that our diplomatic approach will bring a peaceful solution. Yet we agreed that further escalation of the situation by North Korea will require tougher measures from the intelligence community. 
Finally, I assured the Prime Minister that the United States will stand squarely with Japan until all Japanese citizens kidnaped by North Korea are fully accounted for. I strongly condemn the kidnaping of Japanese citizens by the North Koreans. 
President Bush. Well, the first step was to convince China to participate in the process of saying to North Korea that acceptance by the international community and potential help will come when they change their behavior and their attitude toward nuclear weapons. This message has been delivered, and the North Koreans are thinking about it. Should they choose to move forward, which we hope they do, then we will have the Japanese and South Koreans join the dialog so that there's now five of us sitting around the table, all discussing how to see that the Korean Peninsula is nuclear-weapons-free. 
And the importance of this meeting today should say to the world that Japan and the United States stand shoulder-to-shoulder on the issue of North Korea's nuclear weaponry. I believe that we can solve this peacefully. I believe that diplomacy can work. And as importantly, Japan and the United States will not be blackmailed by North Korean threats, and that's important for the North Korean leadership to know. 
Q. I'd like to ask this question of—to both leaders. On this—I understand that in your meeting today you reconfirmed that you'll seek peaceful resolution of this North Korean nuclear issue. The question is, do you think that North Korea, that regime under the leadership of Kim Chong-il can really be a counterpart in negotiations for a peaceful resolution of the problem? 

The President's News Conference With President Vladimir Putin of Russia in St. Petersburg, Russia
June 1, 2003
The United States and Russia are also determined to meet the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. We strongly urge North Korea to visibly, verifiably, and irreversibly dismantle its nuclear weapons program. We are concerned about Iran's advanced nuclear program and urge Iran to comply in full with its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. President Putin and I intend to strengthen our own cooperation on missile defense, which is essential to the security of both our nations.

The President's News Conference With European Union Leaders
June 25, 2003
The United States and the EU are working closely to meet the proliferation challenges posed by North Korea and Iran. The recent report by the International Atomic Energy Agency clearly describes Iran's failure to meet its obligations to the world and to provide access for agency officials.

Remarks Announcing the Nomination of Randall Tobias To Be Global AIDS Coordinator and an Exchange With Reporters
July 2, 2003
We also talked about North Korea. And I appreciate his understanding that the best way to deal with North Korea is to do so in a multinational forum, where the United States and China and South Korea and Japan and, hopefully, Russia all sit down with the North Koreans and make it clear that the world expects them to dismantle a nuclear weapons program and, at the same time, will be willing to help the starving North Korean people.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy in Crawford, Texas
July 21, 2003
President Bush. Well, I appreciate you bringing up the latter, because I do believe we can solve this issue diplomatically by encouraging the neighborhood—the Chinese, the South Koreans, and the Japanese to join us with a single voice that says to Mr. Kim Chong-il, "A decision to develop a nuclear arsenal is one that will alienate you from the rest of the world." 
The desire by the North Koreans to convince the world that they're in the process of developing a nuclear arsenal is nothing new. We've known that for a while. And therefore, we must continue to work with the neighborhood to convince Kim Chong-il that his decision is an unwise decision. And we will do just that. 

The President's News Conference
July 30, 2003
The President. Yes. I think that one of the things that is important to understand in North Korea is that the past policy of trying to engage bilaterally didn't work. In other words, the North Koreans were ready to engage, but they didn't keep their word on their engagement. And that ought to be a clear signal to policymakers of what to expect with North Korea. 
Secondly, in my judgment, the best way to convince the North Koreans to change their attitude about a nuclear weapon program is to have others in the neighborhood assume responsibility alongside the United States. So this morning, interesting enough—I'm glad you asked that question, because I can tell you that I talked to Hu Jintao this morning—not anticipation of your question, but as part of an ongoing process to encourage him to stay involved in the process of discussions with Mr. Kim Chong-il, all attempting to say to him that it is a—it is not in his nation's interest to continue developing these weapons and we would like to see him dismantle those weapons programs. 

Remarks Following a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
August 1, 2003
The President. Yes. Thank you for bringing that question up, because we had some—what we think as positive developments. As you know, we were very concerned about trying to enter into a bilateral agreement with Kim Chong-il because of the fact that he didn't tell the truth to previous administrations. And so we took a new tack, and that was to work with our—with China, primarily China, initially, to engage China in the process so that there is more than one voice speaking to Mr. Kim Chong-il. 
And thanks to the Chinese leadership— and we do applaud Hu Jintao and his administration for agreeing to be a responsible party in the neighborhood in which they live—it looks like we'll have a multinational forum. What that really means is that more than the United States and China will show up to have a meaningful discussion with Mr. Kim Chong-il. That means Japan will be there. After all, Japan is an important part of the neighborhood. South Korea will be there. They've had a vested interest in having discussions and dialogs with Kim Chong-il. And Russia has agreed to join, which means there are now five nations in North Korea sitting at a table, all aimed at convincing—the discussions will be all aimed at convincing Mr. Kim Chong-il to change his attitude about nuclear weaponry. 
In the past, it was the lone voice of the United States speaking clearly about this. Now we'll have other parties who have got a vested interest in peace on the Korean Peninsula. And so I would say the progress is being—is good progress. And we're upbeat about the fact that others are assuming responsibility for peace besides the United States of America. And we'll see how the dialog goes. We fully understand the past. We are hopeful, however, that Mr. Kim Chong-il, because he's hearing other voices, will make the decision to totally dismantle his nuclear weapons program, that he will allow there to be complete transparency and verifiability. And we're optimistic that that can happen

Remarks Following a Meeting With Economic Advisers and an Exchange With Reporters in Crawford, Texas
August 13, 2003
The President. Here's what we're going to do. We're going to continue the dialog with North Korea, to make it clear to them that not only does the United States feel strongly that the Peninsula ought to be nuclear-free, but other countries which live in the neighborhood feel the same way. And remember, the policy has evolved from one of bilateral—you know, pressure to negotiate bilaterally with the North Koreans. That's what we did in the past, and that policy unfortunately failed because the North Koreans didn't keep their word about whether or not they would enrich uranium. 
And so now we've taken another tact, which is to—first of all, to convince the Chinese to be an active participant in a dialog to make sure that the Korean Peninsula is nuclear-free. By the way, the first stage of that happened right here in Crawford when Jiang Zemin came to visit, and he stated clearly after that visit that it was in China's interest that the Korean Peninsula be nuclear-weapons-free. And we're just continuing that policy. It's very helpful that the Russians are involved with the dialog with the North Koreans. It is also very helpful that the South Koreans and the Japanese will be involved. And I think we can deal with this issue in a peaceful way, and we're making good progress. 

Interview With the Armed Forces Radio and Television Service
August 14, 2003
The President. Well, you know, we believe he has got a warhead. We know he's got rockets. And we know he's a dangerous man, and that's why we take his threats seriously. You know, the best thing to do, in my judgment, is to convince others to join us to convince Kim Chong-il to change his behavior. 
In other words, we tried the bilateral approach, and it didn't work because he didn't tell the truth. And so now our strategy is to get the Chinese involved, which they are, and to get the Russians involved and the Japanese involved and the South Koreans involved, all of us involved to tell Kim Chong-il that we expect him to denuclearize the Korean Peninsula for the sake of peace. And that's where we're headed. 
I'd like to solve this diplomatically, and I believe we can. It's going to take a lot of persuasion by countries besides the United States to convince him. He loves the idea of, you know, making people nervous and rattling sabers and getting the world all anxious. And my job is to tell others that let's speak with one voice and convince this man that developing a nuclear weapon on the Korean Peninsula is not in his interests. 






