MID 60701, US v Egypt, 14 aug to 13-Sep-57 to 19-Nov-57




157 - The President's News Conference
August 21, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I am trusting my memory now, to go back to the Aswan Dam is quite a ways in the past. But briefly the offer made to Egypt was a tripartite one--I believe it was the World Bank, United States, and Britain. It was a very carefully worked out program, and its basic feature was that Egypt would devote its full, you might say, excess economic resources into building that dam. 
Specifically, it was understood that there would be no military arming of Egypt in any scale that would interfere with Egypt devoting this economic power of its own in order to complete the dam. 
Now, when this offer was made, Egypt inserted or replied with a number of conditions that were completely unacceptable, and all three of these agencies--the United States, Britain, and the World Bank--just dropped it, forgot it. 
When suddenly it was revived by Egypt some months later, the conditions that had prevailed at the time the offer was made no longer prevailed. Egypt had received a lot of arms and was devoting a great deal of its economic strength to supporting it. So the United States said, in effect, that the conditions no longer prevailed, and they couldn't go along. 
In the meantime, I might add--and again I am trusting to memory, and some of you can correct me if I am wrong--but I think there had been a resolution in the Senate, or a provision in one of our bills that no part of the money in that year's appropriations could be used for the proceeding with the Aswan Dam. So it wasn't merely a question of the Executive, it was also a question of congressional opinion on this matter. 
Now, that is as far as I can go, because I can't remember all the details, but that is the way I remember the case. And it was that the situation just was changed





228 - The President's News Conference
October 30, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will tell you, Mr. von Fremd. If you will go back to July 25th, of a year ago, when the Egyptians seized the canal--I think that was the date, it could be wrong, but it is near that time--if you can point out a day since then that there hasn't been some critical problem placed upon my desk, I can't remember when it was. And I will say this: I find it a bit wearing, but I find it endurable, if you have got the faith in America that I have




