MID 292101, US v USSR, 16 may to 15-Jun-66 to 15-Jul-66

272 - Remarks to Members of a Goodwill Delegation From Austria.
June 15, 1966

Finally, after years of negotiation--after nearly 400 meetings with Soviet representatives, reason prevailed. On May 15, 1955, the treaty was signed. 
Peaceful trade with the Soviet Union is now up to $87 million in 1965 as against $54 million the year before--a hopeful sign; an encouraging sign

I reviewed this only last evening in the White House with Ambassador Goldberg and others at the reception for members of the United Nations. At the end of the month the Soviet Union proposed a treaty very much along the same lines. So I am glad to tell you and proud to tell you and happy to tell you that we are encouraged that--we hope that negotiations looking toward agreements can be started at an early date and without great delay



311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966

We recognize the contributions of the Soviet Union. We recognize the contributions of Yugoslavia in contributing food to India. We are glad that they saw fit to try to do their part. We welcome the support of every nation in the world when that support is given to feeding hungry human beings. In this kind of cooperation we find the seeds of unity against the common enemies of all mankind



320 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
July 5, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. No, we don't think so. We are doing everything we can to reach an agreement on such a treaty. We are very anxious to do it. We hope the Soviet Union will meet us and find an acceptable compromise in language which we can both live with. 
They have some problems at the moment, but we are going to live up to the test ban treaty, religiously and scrupulously follow it. We are going to do everything within the power of our most imaginative people to find language which will bring the nuclear powers together in a treaty which will provide nonproliferation. We think it is one of the most important decisions of our time and we are going to do everything to bring people together on it



326 - Remarks at the Commissioning of the Research Ship - Oceanographer.
July 13, 1966

To the Soviet Union--a major maritime power--I today extend our earnest wish that you may join with us in this great endeavor. 
In accordance with these desires I am happy to announce that one of the first long voyages of - Oceanographer will be a 6-month global expedition in which the scientists from a number of our great nations will participate. It is our intention to invite Great Britain, West Germany, France, the U.S.S.R., India, Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand, Chile, and Peru to participate in the first round-the-world voyage of - Oceanographer





