MID 354101, US v Iran, 21 dec 1983 to 20-Jan-84 to 30-Apr-84

Address to the Nation Announcing the Reagan-Bush Candidacies for Reelection 
January 29, 1984

When I first addressed you from here, our national defenses were dangerously weak, we had suffered humiliation in Iran, and at home we were adrift, possibly because of a failure here in Washington to trust the courage and character of you, the people. But worst of all, we were on the brink of economic collapse from years of government overindulgence and abusive overtaxation. Thus, I had to report that we were "in the worst economic mess since the Great Depression


Interview With Robert L. Bartley and Albert R. Hunt of the Wall Street Journal on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 2, 1984

The President. Well, you have seen us retaliate in the event of when we've had artillery targets to fire back at. 
The President. No, but let me say this also with regard to that. Enough civilians have been the targets in this war. It is true that these terrorist groups and the Syrians and others and the Druze make use of civilians and launch their assaults by rocket or artillery or whatever from civilian enclaves and residential areas where to fire back you are a threat to civilian targets. 
On the matter of the terrible tragedy and the terrorist group, we set out with the best ability we had of reconnaissance and intelligence to make sure that we could locate the perpetrators, their stronghold, so that we would not just be killing somebody without knowing who in revenge, you might say, whether they had anything to do with the dastardly deed or not. And we had some feelings that we had located, but there was additional information we wanted that the people involved were still there. And someone else evidently knew more than we did or was not as careful as we were and took that target out before we could get to it. It was as simple as that. 
The President. Well, unless we continue trying to the best of our ability intelligence-wise to get evidence on the locale of these type terrorists and where they might be. And we have, as I said the other night in my speech, we are contacting our own allies and friends worldwide as to how we can together combat this new kind of warfare. 
I don't think any country, modern times has ever been prepared for this kind of assault. And you don't fight it the way you take a Grenada, for example



Remarks at Eureka College in Eureka, Illinois 
February 6, 1984

The consequences of America's retreat were not long in coming. All of you can remember a few years back when the tragedy of the Iranian hostages was fresh in our minds; when around the world, especially in Afghanistan and Central America, Soviet expansionism proceeded unchecked; when our defenses had declined dramatically and some nations thought they could threaten or harm the United States with impunity


Remarks of the President and King Hussein I of Jordan Following Their Meetings 
February 13, 1984

Today we witness bloodshed and conflict between Iran and Iraq, in Chad, in the Western Sahara, and Lebanon. And now, as never before, it behooves people of good will to work together for peace and stability


Remarks of President Reagan, President Mohammed Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, and King Hussein I of Jordan Following Their Meetings 
February 14, 1984

The war between Iran and Iraq is another sad chapter in the history of the Middle East. We should spare no effort to bring it to an end immediately. No one can possibly benefit from the continuation of bloodshed between peoples who are linked together through the strongest cultural and spiritual bonds. To restore peace between these neighbors, certain concrete steps should be taken by those who are genuinely concerned. The mere expression of good will is no help in the face of continued fighting and escalated tension


The President's News Conference
February 22, 1984
The President. Jerry, what you have just suggested—Iran, itself, had voiced that threat some time ago, that if Iraq did certain things, they would close the Straits of Hormuz. And I took a stand then and made a statement that there was no way that we—and I'm sure this is true of our allies-could stand by and see that sea-lane denied to shipping, and particularly, the tankers that are so essential to Japan, to our Western allies in Europe, and, to a lesser extent, ourselves. We're not importing as much as they require. But there's no way that we could allow that channel to be closed. 
And we've had a naval force for a long time, virtually permanently stationed in the Arabian Sea, and so have some of our allies. But we'll keep that open to shipping


Remarks at the Young Leadership Conference of the United Jewish Appeal 
March 12, 1984

In the United Nations, Iran's representative once called Israel, "a cancerous growth," and Libya's representative has referred to the people of Israel as "the most vile people upon Earth." Well, this so-called anti-Zionism is just another mask for vicious anti-Semitism, and that's something the United States will not tolerate

Third, we seek to go on promoting peace between Israel and her Arab neighbors. In response to the growth of Syrian power and the rise of the Iranian threat, we must help to protect moderate Arabs who seek peace from the radical pressures that have done such harm in Lebanon. 
Since the security of Jordan is crucial to the security of the entire region, it is in America's strategic interest, and I believe it is in Israel's strategic interest, for us to help meet Jordan's legitimate needs for defense against the growing power of Syria and Iran. Now such assistance to Jordan does not threaten Israel, but enhances the prospects for Mideast peace by reducing the dangers of the radical threat

The President's News Conference
April 4, 1984
The shortcomings of early chemical weapons treaties have been made tragically clear in recent years. Chemical weapons have been used against defenseless peoples in Afghanistan, in Southeast Asia, and in the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The use of these terrible weapons also has serious implications for our own security



Remarks at the National Leadership Forum of the Center for International and Strategic Studies of Georgetown University 
April 6, 1984

The results were not surprising: the massacres of Kampuchea followed by the Vietnamese invasion, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the rise of Iranian extremism and the holding of Americans hostage, Libyan coercion in Africa, Soviet and Cuban military involvement in Angola and Ethiopia, their subversion in Central America, and the rise of state-supported terrorism



