MID 60801, US v USSR, 8 sep to 8-Oct-58 to 23-Jun-59



261 - Radio and Television Report to the American People Regarding the Situation in the Formosa Straits.
September 11, 1958

This plan would liquidate all of the free world positions in the Western Pacific area and bring them under captive governments which would be hostile to the United States and the free world. Thus the Chinese and Russian Communists would come to dominate at least the Western half of the now friendly Pacific Ocean. 
So, aggression by ruthless despots again imposes a clear danger to the United States and to the free world
In this effort the Chinese Communists and the Soviet Union appear to be working hand in hand. Last Monday I received a long letter on this subject from Prime Minister Khrushchev. He warned the United States against helping its allies in the Western Pacific. He said that we should not support the Republic of China and the Republic of Korea. He contended that we should desert them, return all of our naval forces to our home bases, and leave our friends in the far East to face, alone, the combined military power of the Soviet Union and Communist China. Does Mr. Khrushchev think that we have so soon forgotten Korea? I must say to you very frankly and soberly, my friends, the United States cannotaccept the result that the Communists seek. Neither can we show, now, a weakness of purpose--a timidity--which would surely lead them to move more aggressively against us and our friends in the Western Pacific area. 
If they have now decided to risk a war, it can only be because they, and their Soviet allies, have decided to find out whether threatening war is a policy from which they can make big gains. 
I have repeatedly sought to make clear our position in this matter so that there would not be danger of Communist miscalculation. The Secretary of State on September fourth made a statement to the same end. This statement could not, of course, cover every contingency. Indeed, I interpret the Joint Resolution as requiring me not to make absolute advance commitments, but to use my judgment according to the circumstances of the time. But the statement did carry a clear meaning to the Chinese Communists and to the Soviet Union. There will be no retreat in the face of armed aggression, which is part and parcel of a continuing program of using armed force to conquer new regions. 


274 - The President's News Conference
October 1, 1958

Now, we have, I believe in the last 7 months, put four satellites in orbit. Our plan was devised, as I pointed out before, with an entirely different purpose from that that the Soviets had.
I should say an extra word there about their civil war: if it is a civil war, why is Russia already saying, through Mr. Khrushchev in his letters, that they are ready to participate in this war? If that is a civil war I am quite ignorant as to what the term really means




286 - Remarks at the Dedication of the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service of Georgetown University.
October 13, 1958

He made no wild charges. In fact, it was a speech where every statement was annotated--corroborated--by the documents that he himself had procured and brought out, often out of Russia. That series of documents, by the way, was in a suitcase--two suitcases. They were filled, and he knew exactly where to go to pick each one and to read it. So I still remember that occasion if for nothing else than because of the excellence of the presentation



290 - Remarks at the National Corn Picking Contest, Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
October 17, 1958

In our ability to produce, we have a tremendous advantage over the communist world. The free American farm worker out-produces the collectivized farmer of the Soviet Union by something like four or five to one.



293 - Televised Panel Discussion With a Group of Republican Women, San Francisco, California.
October 21, 1958

The scientists went into this very thoroughly, what they believed to be the activities of the Soviets, our capabilities, technical and every other kind. finally in early 1955 they told me "We are behind and we have got to get busy." I urgently recommended this. On the very day that they gave me that recommendation, I put those programs on the first priority, so far as talent, time, and expenditures were involved in the Defense Department. And from that moment on, we have been spending hundreds of millions annually, and not as I say, below a million before that time. The result is, we are rapidly filling the gap that existed; and in some ways, I think that our scientists have already achieved what we would call even more than equality, particularly in types and kinds, even if not in numbers



295 - Radio and Newsreel Panel Discussion Sponsored by the National Republican Committee in Chicago.
October 22, 1958

In numbers of foot soldiers, of course, the Russians are way ahead of us, but they have always been that, and they have got the men. We don't believe in that. We believe in having adequate, efficient and modernized forces that will prevent war and make it too costly to wage. 
On the over-all, I would say America is the strongest military power there is in the world
THE PRESIDENT. Well now, I agree with some of the things you have heard, because of this reason: the Russians dictate what will be the education of their children. You say they are "offering" education. They are directing education, which is a vast difference, because they are being trained--you might say atmosphered in the habit of regimentation




296 - Radio and Television Address Delivered at the "Fight-to-Win" Dinner Rally in the Stockyards Arena, Chicago, Illinois.
October 22, 1958

One of my early acts, almost six years ago, was to launch exhaustive missile studies by top scientists of America. After some months they reported their findings that America badly trailed the Soviets in long-range ballistic missiles. The scientists recommended, to me, urgent action



308 - Television Address Delivered in the Fifth Regiment Armory, Baltimore, Maryland.
October 31, 1958

And then the opposition thought it had a Sputnik issue. Again they tried the tactics of fright. They said that our missile programs lagged woefully behind the Soviets



310 - The President's News Conference
November 5, 1958

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I hadn't got to the last part of your question in my own thinking. This is a case that has not been analyzed within our own governmental circles. I have read about it carefully. I am shocked that even the Soviets would do this kind of thing, to take an author who has been so honored by the Nobel Prize group and then apparently condemn him because some of the things he said didn't coincide with their doctrine. 
It's a sort of sad thing, I believe, when we find a brain and a creative mind of that kind finally told, in effect, "You will either write what we say or you won't write." That's what it is. It is a terrible thing--i put it this way: I'm not going to go into the details of the immigration laws because there might be something I don't know about them, but if he came in, I'd like to see and talk to him
THE PRESIDENT. Well, all you can do with a government such as the Soviets. You protest, you request more information. So far it has been not forthcoming

THE PRESIDENT. Wall, this morning--somewhere along about noon, I think, I have the committee up-- Mr. foster, General Weyland, and Dr. Kistiakowsky. They are coming up and we are going to have a conference before they start. That is just starting on November 10th



318 - The President's News Conference
December 10, 1958

Later, in July and August I think it was, in Potsdam, there was again the Russians, the--I believe I said Germans before, I meant Russians, sorry--the Russians, the British, and the Americans meeting, and there was more specific detail agreed upon as to how Berlin should be divided and governed. 
At Geneva, in 1955, all of us agreed that we would follow the program of reuniting Germany by free elections. Now, that agreement on the part of the Russians was quickly repudiated. But nevertheless we have stood always for that basis. 
We have refused to take any part or even talk about a program that did not contemplate peaceful methods for the reuniting of Germany, and we have always insisted, and so have West Germany, Britain, and France, that this must be by means of free elections. 
But, in the meantime, and until that situation is finally composed by some agreement of all the powers, including, of course, Germany, we feel we have responsibility and the duty that is even more than our rights in maintaining the freedom of the western part of Berlin. I say "we"-we now have four countries agreed on it. At that time there were three-France, Britain, and the United States. 
So, what I should like to make clear, there is no attempt on the part of the United States in this position to be arbitrary in the sense of trying to irritate or anger anybody else. 
We do say that we stand firm on therights and the responsibilities that we have undertaken, and that we cannot possibly fail to carry out those responsibilities, because if we did, we' would be retreating and abandoning people that have a right to expect the kind of cooperation that we have promised them. 
So I want to make clear that we are not doing anything for ourselves. We are doing it for a free people that have a right to this kind of cooperation, promised them in the pledged word of a number of governments. That was the case I wanted to bring up to date
Now, I do know, and have seen these reports; as a matter of fact, I saw it in a headline this morning--an 8500-mile missile. I would know no reason whatsoever why this could not be done. .We know that they have a very fine technique, and we know also they have exploded bombs of over a megaton in size. 
We have done the same. We have also successfully tested an ICBM of sufficient range; and, therefore, I would know no reason to attempt to refute any statement that you have seen in the paper of this kind. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there is absolutely no intelligence, no reliable evidence of any kind that indicates that the Soviets have flown a nuclearpowered airplane. I think--to show why I discount it--even if there were some piece of evidence somewhere along the line, there has been the experience of our own technicians. I think our own scientists believe that if you merely wanted to get an airframe off the ground with a unit of nuclear power, you could possibly do it. But in the present state of the art and of science, there is no usefulness that anyone could possibly see for such a plane. Therefore, our own research efforts have been developed toward the production of a model or an airplane that will have satisfactory performance characteristics either for some peaceful or a military purpose; but we do not abandon the basic research on the power plant and its, you might say, transmission, which is the basis of the whole thing. We just merely say that there is no use of going into a field where the whole purpose would be to get a plane a few hundred feet off the ground
I mentioned the Advisory Committee. They set up in their great wisdom a division of Germany among three powers. France was not then mentioned because the Soviets didn't think they should be. 
Now, that division was made by political decision and, frankly, I-because Berlin had been so destroyed--when I saw what the politicians decided to do--and I don't mind saying that I urged a line that was further east; specifically I wanted to include Thuringia because I said we would get that far before the other fellow did, and I thought we should have it. 
Now, when we got into this decision though--it was made by Mr. Churchill, Mr. Roosevelt and the Generalissimo [Stalin] themselves-that was confirmed at Yalta, from that moment onward the problem became how would you control it. 
My own solution was one that probably was a little bit naive, and it was certainly rejected in a hurry, which was to build a cantonment type of capital at the juncture of the British, American, and Russian sectors. Then we would have no problem. But Berlin meant to all the political figures, and I think probably they were a little smarter than I was in this case, Berlin has meant the capital of the German Empire and, later, Germany, so long that it probably would have been an impossible solution.
What I am getting at is that then, at Potsdam, they did consider all of the means of ingress, so far as I know. I never read all of the Potsdam papers, but I assume it was done there. 
Now this means, I might remark this to you, that shortly after hostilities ceased, and in view of this prior political decision which was made in January or maybe the first of February, I had to retreat with the American forces in the center something over 125 miles. So it was just simply a political decision, that's all there was to it
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Roberts, I have forgotten whether we tied that particular statement of purpose with any other in the same statement, I mean in the same sentence or in the same paragraph. As I recall, that was a specific thing of its own. Another one was, you will recall, increasing the scope of our contacts, and their number. 
I think it was four major points, but I think that the matter of reunification by peaceful and nationwide elections stood by itself. If it didn't, I am slightly mistaken; but in any event, I don't know of any change of policy that we would certainly be now ready to propose to the NATO nations. 
What I do think is, here is something that has to be constantly studied, explored, to keep up with the changing proposals, free cities, and that sort of thing--I mean free city in an international sense, not the way we are talking about it--that kind of thing. 
So we have to keep up, abreast of the situation, but I have no new policy to maintain



6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 9, 1959

All this is given only as a matter of history; as a record of our progress in space and ballistic missile fields in no more than four years of intensive effort. At the same time we clearly recognize that some of the recent Soviet accomplishments in this particular technology are indeed brilliant



7 - Remarks and Discussion at the National Press Club.
January 14, 1959

First, I would say this: it is absolutely fatuous and futile to try to balance, item by item, the progress of two great nations in their technology of defense. We do know that in certain types of missile development the Soviets have performed brilliantly indeed. But we have a defense, I must point out, that became it is defense must concentrate not only on one possible type of combat but every conceivable kind. We have to have balanced forces and not merely one that aims, let us say, at the destruction of cities or bases anywhere in the world. 
Now in the missile field itself, I should think that if we did not believe that the other people were somewhat ahead in certain phases of the missile development, we would indeed be a little stupid, because they have been working at it for many years, and our urgent work in the long-range missile has started only something like 4 years ago. 
Now in that time, I want to say with all the depth of understanding I believe I have, our scientists have made remarkable progress. There has been a speed of development that is exemplified here in these late months by many successful flights of the Atlas, by the fact that training units for those weapons are now being produced, their bases are being built, that certain of our intermediate, that is, the fairly long-range weapons, are some deployed. This kind of thing means that we are going very, very fast. 
Also, to show that this is not just one item that we should consider, take airplanes. We have one plane now in the fighter squadrons flying at more than twice the speed of sound. There are a few of our bombers that are doing the same thing, and at great altitudes and at great efficiency. 
So that to disturb ourselves too much that we have not yet caught up with another great power and people with great technical skill in a particular item, seems to me to show a lack of a sense of balance. And that is what we are concerned with, because we don't know anything about time, place, or character of any aggression that could occur. We have to be prepared, and we have got to be prepared to respond instantly. I think we are. We have made very remarkable progress
THE PRESIDENT. Well, going backwards at that question, I should say that any effort to lay out something that was new that would be called a definite proposal would be quite a great mistake. I think that the most that would be expected of such an informal visit as Mr. Mikoyan is making would be that we would try to get behind each other's facial expressions and to see what we are really thinking. Is there an honest, peaceful motive .behind these things? Are both of us really so sick of the burdens that we have to carry in the armament field that we want to find with some intelligence and some common approach a way out of this dilemma? 
That is, I think, the most we could achieve from an informal visit such as this, if anything, because if you try to make a proposal, you get into what you might call a conference in which something is dotted and signed, and then it becomes really quite a job. 
Now as to the different proposals of the Soviets and ourselves respecting Germany and Europe, we think it is just an exercise in futility to try to demilitarize, neutralize, and completely disarm a people as strong, as important, and virile as is the German people. 
On the other hand, that being the general tenor of the Russian proposals, we oppose to that concept this one: that we would say we don't believe in the free arming of Germany in the sense that Hitler tried to rearm it. We would like to see Germany so intertwine itself with other European nations in its economy and its thinking and its defense exercises, that it doesn't have to do this. It is part of a community. 
But if we handled the thing separately--I mean separately from France, Belgium, Holland, Italy, and so on--we must remember this: this people cannot live in isolation, and the great movements toward integration in Europe that have now taken place, I think are proof that the West Germans at least, and I would personally believe all the German people, want to live in peace. We should be quite ready to make any assurances, make any material moves that would assure Russia that there is no danger from this people; and they should not, in our opinion, insist upon really making them as sort of a vacuum in both the security world, the economic, and every other, the political world. They shouldn't do it because it just won't work, in my opinion. [Applause] 
I do recall this: sometime back--oh, I don't know, 10, 12, 18 months ago--I suggested that one of the things we ought to promote is more visits by our people. Now, some of this has been going on, and I even went so far as to suggest people that were deemed in Russia very important, and by that I meant even in the political world. It is hard for me to interpret the meaning of one meeting, but I would welcome more of them because I believe thoroughly that in the long run peaceful negotiation is going to grow out of one thing that I just mention with respect to a problem in our own country: better understanding of each other. That is going to be brought about, not by glaring across an iron curtain at each other, but getting together, our news, our ideas. I could make quite a speech on this one because it is something I have been entangled in for a long time. But at Geneva we had, as I recall, 17 programs we wanted to put over in October with the foreign ministers meeting, and one of the greatest was to increase our contacts, ideas, literature, books, movies, and above all, people. 
So, I would say this: if this means that they are making an experiment in sending some of their higher people over here, I'm all for it. And I would again repeat a very prayerful hope that I expressed some time back: regardless of our own political and social views about a government, or about individuals, America should not forget the requirements of courtesy. [Applause] 


17 - The President's News Conference
January 21, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, it would be pretty hard to give a real worthwhile opinion of an individual based on one fairly long conversation and one brief meeting with him, I think, back in 1945, probably on top of Lenin's Tomb in Moscow. 
There is no question he is able, clever, and quick; and he is consistently, I might say, emphatic in his argument for and in favor of the Marxist doctrine as interpreted by Lenin and later other authorities of the Soviets. He is extremely intelligent. 
Now, as to what might have been accomplished, as all of you know, there was no attempt at any negotiation. It was a statement of problems on both sides, trying to show some of the reasons why the positions in these issues were taken, as they are taken, by each side, and in an effort, therefore, to get a clearer understanding of the problems now existing. There were no new proposals of which I am aware at all. 
With respect to his visit around the United States, I think that was somewhat more important; and for that reason, actually, I sent him a message, because I was very hopeful that he would carry back information that is accurate. No matter what or how much of it could be used for propaganda purposes, I would think for his own people he would be indeed accurate in his reporting. And I think there, one thing he must be sure of is that America wants peace, is ready to conciliate, is ready to match reasonableness with reasonableness, but it simply won't be pushed around. I believe he will understand that the American people believe that, just as much as does any official of the Government.
THE PRESIDENT. As I understood his conversations, this was their purport. He claims that every single proposition that the Kremlin has advanced has as its purpose peace, and it is truly a peace gesture, and therefore when we do not agree, we are negative, rigid, and are unready to meet these peaceful gestures. 
I certainly, on my part, tried to make it clear that we are ready to explore anything, any time, any place, as long as there was reasonable chance, opportunity for advancing the peace. But merely to sit and to argue rigidly that any particular proposal that they make is certainly a step toward peace is a little bit hard to swallow
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know. But I think this: the visit of any individual that more or less publicizes a sort of, not routine, but sort of a normal exchange of visits, to my mind is all to the good. I am convinced from reports of people that have over the past year, year and a half, come back--these committees of the steel industry and professors and psychologists and numbers of people, committees like that--they come back and everyone reports this: the Russian people, as such, want peace just as earnestly, as seriously, as we do. And that, to my mind, is the great fact that has for all of us great hope. Because the more, therefore, we have people meeting people, I am certain the better is our situation




21 - The President's News Conference
January 28, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. No, no, I didn't have any. What I did--I think I reported this to you once before, possibly not--I had reports from friends around the country that called me up, one of them in California, I recall, saying it was obvious there was an attempt on the part of Mr. Mikoyan to make this interpretation, that the people in the Government were particularly divided on certain points. It might be Berlin or some other question. 
Now, because of these reports, in certain instances these friends made a special point of meeting with Mr. Mikoyan during the course of the evening and asserting their belief that the United States, in its firmness in refusing to retreat a single inch from its rights and from its obligations and responsibility, that all of us were one; it didn't make any difference whether it was in Government or civil life.
Now, I certainly tried to make that clear myself
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would say this: we seem very prone to give 100 percent credence to some statement of the Soviets if it happens to touch upon our own anxieties or beliefs or convictions, and then some other statement we dismiss completely and we say, "Why, that is just another repetition of the old bald-faced lie." 
Now, I don't know exactly what Mr. Khrushchev has in mind. I do know this: our missile system is going forward as rapidly as possible under the guidance of the finest scientists that we can accumulate. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think that any talks that deal fruitfully with the differences between our different peoples, our different governments, are useful. 
I want to point out that the United States has constantly desired to get the political questions with which we are faced in a broader context, to try to solve these political questions as a matter of principle--get some basic agreement; and then within that context to get all different technical and, you might say, mechanical self-enforcing types of agreements like protection, better assurance against surprise attack, a banning of testing of all kinds of the nuclear weapons. This is the kind of agreement that we need if you are going to have a real effective result, but under which progress will be realized only, in my opinion, if we have a better general understanding about the peace of Europe, the readiness of both sides to renounce force and subversion in our efforts to maintain our positions in the world and to help our friends. And as to both sides, I would like to see some kind of a program that we could agree upon and which would have, within it, certain self-enforcing arrangements. By this I mean mutual inspection so that it would inspire mutual confidence. 
With such things I believe we could count on real progress and finally a lightening of the load that all of us now have to carry
There have been no plans made to send anyone to Russia at this moment. Certainly I would not disagree with anyone's plan, if they want to do it, and if our Government thinks they should do it. But so far it has not been completely studied. 
Now, so far as Mr. Khrushchev's visit is concerned, you couldn't do this in the informal way that Mr. Mikoyan did. Mr. Mikoyan came, I believe it was said, as a guest of the Embassy, and he got his visa on that basis. 
Well, you couldn't do that with the head of the government, and it would be something entirely different, so I think the situations are not comparable. 
Now, the pure dictatorship, at least in the case of Russia, has had to absorb into itself certain incentives of a material kind that they certainly at one time never did contemplate. 



26 - The President's News Conference
February 4, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. The position we have always held is that the responsibility voluntarily undertaken by the four occupying powers of maintaining their forces in Berlin was one that did necessarily give theright of supporting those forces. 
Now we felt that since we had to perform that responsibility, we had theright to bring in the kind of supplies and remove the same kind of supplies from that particular spot, Berlin. Therefore, we have never acknowledged any right of inspection on the part of another of the participating powers with respect to our cargoes and the kind of equipment and supplies we are carrying forward. 
Now we feel, in other words, this is a violation of the agreements, implied if not always explicitly stated; because, naturally, the people that made these could not foresee every kind of little difficulty that could occur. So we believe it is a violation of the implied agreement, arrangement between the four. While up to this moment the protests have been only at the local level by the military, we have this morning lodged a vigorous protest with the Foreign Office in Moscow. Whether or not that message has yet been delivered, I do not know; but I do know we have sent it
THE PRESIDENT. They also said that they invented the flying machine--[laughter]--and the automobile and the telephone and other things. Now I am not trying to be too facetious; I am trying to ask this one question of you people, though: why should you be so respectful of this statement this morning, if you are not so respectful of the other three? 
I think there is always a design behind every Soviet pronouncement. Now I think you people probably know it already, but last night or this morning there was an Atlas firing that was absolutely successful; it was long range, and we think it was a very good performance. 
I don't know what the words "pinpoint accuracy" mean. They sound to me like rather propaganda words. 
Now I am not going to decry their accomplishments. But I am not going to get involved or worried about trying to take everything they could do in every field and placing an equation there and finding that it comes to equality. 
We have got a very much more variegated, a more, we believe, balanced type of defensive organization than have they; and we believe that with the dispersion that we have and with the competence of our planes and supported as they are by the missiles that we have developed, that we have a very splendid posture today in the whole security field. And I would not be at all surprised that more statements of this kind will be made. Apparently, they are believed all around the world, and too implicitly. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we don't believe it has. Quite naturally, if they are going to attack by surprise, there are going to be some losses suffered by American forces, and possibly by America itself in some other ways. That is just implicit in the opportunity that a dictator has to start a war himself. 
Now, that is the reason that we have to be so alert. But as I have told you before, we are constantly improving our warning equipment. 
We have dispersed through the building of new airfields, we have dispersed our strategic air force much more widely than it was a few years back. We have made alert arrangements until a very good portion of this whole force could be in the air in a matter of minutes; and on top of that, we have our own kinds of weapons that would be useful. 
Now, if we were going to assume that our entire forces were going to be wiped out instantly so we would be helpless, then we must be figuring that these people--taking some factor of effectiveness and for near misses, let us say 70 percent or anything you want to, how many of these missiles are they going to send off in one volley all over this world to immobilize us? There finally comes such a thing as just a logical limit to capability, and we know that there is not that kind of capability existing in the world today. 
And I will say this: our own capability is to make certain not only that our retaliatory power is strong, but gets more and more secure through our planning and development, more secure all the time; so that we do not believe that there is a relative increase in their capacity
THE PRESIDENT. Well now, I will not tell you, for this sample reason: most of the information that I have in this field is of course through briefings, and I cannot tell you at this moment whether such as I have is in the restricted or confidential area or not. 
You can go to the Secretary of Defense and ask him exactly the same question, and if he knows anything about it and knows whether he can give it, he will talk to you. 
But I just feel that it is not wise for me, because my memory is simply not that good that I can tell you whether it is in the public domain or whether it is in the restricted field





29 - The President's News Conference
February 10, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would think, Mr. Arrowsmith, there is very little to add to his statement. As he came back, he made the statement at the airport, and he told that he detected a greater unified purpose among the Western allies, their firmness in their purpose of enforcing their rights and notaccepting the theory that the Soviets could abandon their agreed responsibilities and transfer them to officials or to the GDR. 
Now I think that the points he made speak for themselves, and I don't think there is much to add to it. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, not so far as I know. Of course the doctors don't make any exact predictions as to when a satisfactory return to his health will be achieved. But there has been suggested, for example, a foreign ministers meeting between the Soviets and some of the Western allies. That would take some preparation. There has been no agreement. 
I believe the Russians themselves are more concerned, Mr. Khrushchev is concerned, in a head of government meeting, as he calls an informal and without an agenda type. Well, that would take still a great deal of preparation. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will answer the first part of it very specifically: the orders are very strict on this matter. Now occasionally there are errors in navigation and sometimes there are storms and things of that kind; once in a while we believe there are false radio signals that will take a plane out of course. But any thought of playing fox and hounds, as you call it, to cause scrambling is contrary to orders. 
Actually, I have forgotten now the limit, but I established it personally, sometime back a couple of years ago, and I am sure that this happening is accidental
THE PRESIDENT. You say that it appears that he would like for me to come there. 
Did you read the speech in which he suggested that I might come, and what he had to say, particularly about the United States as a whole, its leaders, and some of the language he used to describe us as a nation-and others, even more than myself? 1 
I would think that certainly I would have to wait for some more official type of, and more, let us say, persuasive kind of invitation than that.




36 - The President's News Conference
February 18, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I haven't read this speech except in a most abbreviated sort. 
I would say this: he must be talking about shooting to stop us from doing our duty. After all, that is what is going to happen if it happens. We are not saying that we are going to shoot our way into Berlin. 
We say we are just going to go and continue carrying out our responsibilities to those people, the ones that we agreed to undertake way back in 1945.
So that if we are stopped it will be somebody else using force. 
The West has shown time and again its readiness to negotiate, on the whole problem of Germany and the region, anything reasonable in which both sides can have confidence. 
We don't want, and we realize it would be serf-defeating, to build up anything that the Soviets could legitimately consider a menace on their border; we don't want to do that. 
We want to do something that is decent; but to say now that one of the things that we want to throw in the pot, the thinning out of troops, and so on--there are a thousand factors each of which affects the others: the morale of the West, what their readiness is, what they believe about us, what our troops mean to them, even more than their actual strength. 
I think that the best we can say is this: here we search for a just peace. That just peace is not going to come about until two sides can find some reasonable basis where these specific problems can be solved. Until that comes about, I think we have to do the best we can, stay strong, but always holding out a hand ready to be grasped if it will be grasped in good faith. 



42 - The President's News Conference
February 25, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Smith, Mr. Dulles and I have always taken this position with respect to nonaggression pacts: everybody that is signatory to the United Nations agreement has already signed those pacts and therefore we see no need for them. 
Now, on the other hand, I do not suppose we would have any great objection if there were in fact what you refer to as possibilities, practical possibilities for achieving confidence on each side that these treaties or this special treaty, rather than the general treaty, would be effectively carried out. And until you do have that kind of confidence coming out of some practical self-enforcing feature of the treaty, why then it would seem to me that they would have very little value
Now, the obviously, palpably, intransigent attitude of Mr. Khrushchev is, of course, not only--it has not only been well known, but it seems really to be emphasized. And at the moment when the logical purpose of Mr. Macmillan's visit was to try to create an atmosphere in which negotiations would be possible, this development is not one that, certainly, you could call hopeful. 
This is the only logical attitude that the United States, and the West, as I see it, can take: first, that we are not going to give one single inch in the preservation of our rights, and of discharging our responsibility in this particular region, especially Berlin. 
There can be nonegotiation on this particular point of right, and of retention of responsibility. 
Now, the United States has always made dear, we are always ready to negotiate when the other person will give us the slightest area or region in which to negotiate; but if there is to be a positive answer and a negative answer to give to any question before you do attempt to negotiate, then I can't see very much use for conferences. Indeed, if the same kind of attitude is shown insistently and always, why, I must say the future doesn't seem to hold much promise for negotiation. 
Now this, in spite of the fact that there have been a number of things that have occurred. You will recall way back, there was a refusal to negotiate respecting the reunification of Austria. Well, that was accomplished. And down the road with respect to West Germany and so on, there have been other concessions; but they certainly come very rarely and from our viewpoint, at least, the refusals are so illogical that they do not promise a great deal for the establishment of a just peace. But, as I say, we have got to be ready, alert to opportunities to negotiate when there is any real promise of success, just as we are going to be strong and are strong and alert in making certain that others cannot take advantage of us or divide us by any kind of threat
THE PRESIDENT. Well, frankly, I would say that hopes are not as strong as they were in the past. 
We have, as you know, been quite ready to concede anything that did not seem to us absolutely needful in this regard. For example, at first we thought we should make any agreement about the cessation of tests a part of a major effort to reach general, or to begin general disarmament agreements. 
Well, we said that isn't necessary, and so we receded from that. But we do say this: first, you cannot have a veto in any part of this process from the establishment of the control council right on down to theright of the groups to inspect the suspected areas at any moment. Any time you have a veto, the thing is defeated, and therefore what you might call theright, the inherent right of the parties to this agreement to make certain what has happened, if there is any physical evidence that something has happened, that right must be untrammeled. 
That is what we have always insisted upon. In fact, it's a part of the basic feature we have always insisted upon. There must be some kind of substantive proof that we are each doing exactly what he promises to do. That's all there is to it. 
And I'll tell you this: frankly, we very, very definitely want some kind of an agreement. We want to ease the tensions of the world, and I don't intend to make provocative speeches anywhere. I don't think it is good. But I do say this: we are going to be just as firm as anyone can be in maintaining therights and the positions that we know are agreed upon, either in treaty or just in conformance with normal human decency



43 - Remarks at the U.S. Savings Bond Conference.
February 25, 1959

The readiness of our people to invest their savings into bonds is one of the features that we must count upon, if we are to have a successful America; if we are going to be able confidently and permanently to counter the Soviet threat to our form of life. It is the kind of thing that bespeaks morale and faith in America. Certainly without this kind of work, the debt management by the Federal Treasury would be much more difficult--I would say well-nigh impossible. And when we think that our debt is in the range where already we are spending for interest alone, without a single cent devoted to debt retirement, some eight billion dollars, we realize the kind of volume of work of which you are speaking

What we are talking about is this: finding out what is necessary. We know that we have to meet the Soviet threat. We know that for some years to come expenditures for this function are incalculable, they are almost astronomical--if I knew of a stronger adjective, I would use it. I would use everything except preposterous, because we have to do i

Now my friends, I spoke about the Soviet menace. It is something that we have learned and are learning always to live with because it cannot be eliminated merely by wishful thinking. We can be strong in our understanding and in our intellects, in our spirit--meaning our morale in our economy and in our military, to make sure that the United States will not have its rights violated or be unable to perform its responsibilities in the world



48 - The President's News Conference
March 4, 1959

Of course I always say there is room for negotiation. The only place that I said that we--they must be perfectly clear in their minds that we will not retreat from the exercise of therights that are ours with respect to Berlin, and to carry the responsibilities that are laid upon us by these international agreements until eventually there is a new solution for the German problem. 
But, our readiness to negotiate with respect to German peace and everything else has not only been emphasized time and again; if there were indeed no room for negotiation there, then there certainly would be no reason for any kind of a meeting. 
Now, did you ever stop to think what a general mobilization would mean in a time of tension? 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have been under periods of tension since '49, certainly--it was either '48 or '49 in the first Berlin situation. 
Now, if you are going to keep a general mobilization for a long time in countries--democracies--such as ours, well, there is just one thing you have and that is a garrison state. General mobilization means all kinds of diversion of materials and other kinds of resources from the operation of a free economy; it means keeping your nation on a basis of readiness all the time. 
This is, to my mind, not only futile; this would be the most disastrous thing we could do. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I said that with respect to West Berlin and our rights and our responsibilities we could not abandon them, we never would abandon them. That is what I said. 
Now, within the whole field of a peace treaty there could be very many different types of solutions, propositions, advanced; and I think all of them would have to be discussed in, as far as you could, a constructive manner. 
Let's remember this: our policy and our agreement in 1955 at Geneva was that Germany would be reunited by means of free elections. For the moment, that has certainly been thrown overboard by the Soviets. They say the only possibility is by negotiation between these two separate Germanys. 
Well, I don't see how that can possibly be a feature of any proposal made now. We stand, with our allies, as our policy is that the uniting of Germany would come about, should be by free elections. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mrs. Craig, all I can say there, is this: there is a continuing committee, both in the State Department, and then it meets, you know, in Europe each year on the allied position on this business of trade with the Communists. 
There have been changes made in not so much our policies but you might say in our specific items in which we are ready to see other countries trade. I do not believe that at this moment we are ready for any radical change in policy with respect to trade. 
Now, when you come down to the possibility that there may have been some lessening of this rigidity of which I speak in the Soviet attitude, that we can't tall until events unfold a little bit further

THE PRESIDENT. As you know, this note, as usual, is very, very long, and of course it takes long and earnest study by our staffs before any detailed comment would be in order. 
It starts off, of course, on the negative side, with the usual-oh, repetitions of their great efforts toward peace, charging us with all sorts of evil intentions. And it is filled with distortions. 
There is one of them, by the way, I think I ought to correct. It is to the general effect that the United States, or the West, has rushed right in after the war to rearm West Germany. Now, there was no rearmament of West Germany that started at all until after West Germany had become a member of NATO in 1954. 
East Germany had 50,000 troops under arms in 1950, and by 1953, had some 225-240,000 under arms in East Germany. 
So this kind of distortion is the thing that we find constantly in the propaganda coming from the other side. 
Now, on the more hopeful and positive side, you will find in the final paragraphs the admission that there could be something done by foreign ministers rather than heads of state, and indicating some--oh, lessening of the rigidity of the propositions they have heretofore advanced, certainly in the notes of, I think it was last November and of January. 
So I would say: well now, you have at least that on the positive side; we are taking it for the moment just as optimistically as we can and, certainly, with our allies we will study how we can make any answer that could be constructive



53 - The President's News Conference
March 11, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. I'd say first of all that I would not expect ever to be in the business of reacting instantly to one of Mr. Khrushchev's wisecracks or whatever he calls it, that we take as a serious suggestion. We have allies. We try to apply in the free world the same kind of procedure in the reaching of decisions that you do in a democracy. We have discussion and lively debate, and then we try to figure out what is best for all America. 
Well now, this is our system when dealing with our allies. You don't expect to have a doctor hit you on the knee with a rubber hammer and your foot jump quickly up and have that kind of a system in responding to suggestions of Mr. Khrushchev's about anything. 
And I say right now, we have four nations conferring among themselves as to an answer on the latest Russian note; that having been concerted, NATO will be consulted and we go ahead on that basis. And that is exactly what we will do to reply to anything else. 
Now, violating everything I have said, I'd say I don't think much of it.
THE PRESIDENT. I think we might as well understand this--might as well all of us understand this: I didn't say that nuclear war is a complete impossibility. I said it couldn't as I see it free anything. Destruction is not a good police force. You don't throw hand grenades around streets to police the streets so that people won't be molested by thugs. 
This is exactly the way that you have to look at nuclear war, or any other. Indeed, even in the bombing of the, you might say, relatively moderate type that we had in World War II, we destroyed cities, but not to compel anything except the enemy to allow our ground forces to move forward. 
And, I must say, to use that kind of a nuclear war as a general thing looks to me a self-defeating thing for all of us. After all, with that kind of release of nuclear explosions around this world, of the numbers of hundreds, I don't know what it would do to the world and particularly the Northern Hemisphere; and I don't think anybody else does.
But I know it would be quite serious. 
Therefore, we have got to stand right ready and say, "We will do what is necessary to protect ourselves, but we are never going to back up on our rights and our responsibilities."
THE PRESIDENT. I don't know that it has any application, particularly, to the Berlin situation as of now; but I have said this time and time again. As a matter of fact you don't have to quote me, quote the Communists. If you have read their books and their writings, why, you know that one of the things by which they hope to weaken the free world is to show that free enterprise can't work, can't afford to do the things it needs to do

I have argued and urged for years that we are living and we are going to live in a tense period because of the actions and the attitude of the Communist imperialism. 
Communist imperialism is never going to decrease the pressure of its efforts to promote world revolution, resulting in the communization of the world and with Moscow at the head. 
Now, they focus these tensions, or they find some way where they can make it very difficult for the free world to carry on its planned program of strengthening the associations among the several nations that are free and trying to remain free and to keep our defenses strong and adequate, as we seek this just peace. 
Now, every time one of these incidents, or one of these, you might say, these foci of tension occur, we have something that's called a crisis, and everybody has a new answer. 
Whether it is sputnik or it's Quemoy or it's Korea or whatever it is, what we have to do is to stand steady, as I see it, to be alert, to watch what we are doing, and to make certain that we know how and where we would have to produce action, if action became necessary. 
What I am trying to point out is this: that adequacy of our defenses is not going to be especially increased or strengthened by any particular sudden action in response to one of these moments of increased tension. 
We are certainly not going to fight a ground war in Europe. What good would it do to send a few more thousands or indeed even a few divisions of troops to Europe? 
I do not see why we would think that we--with something of a half a million troops, Soviet and some German in East Germany, with 175 Soviet divisions in that neighborhood--why in the world would we dream of fighting a ground war? When our allied forces were capable of winning wars in that region, it was in World War II. No matter who they had been fighting, they could have done so. But after all, our divisions which were from two to three times the strength of the average of that time against us, totaling, I suppose, 120 divisions in the West, were supported by the most powerful air forces and navies of that time that could be put together. 
Now, we don't want to get into that kind of a miscalculation, and certainly that kind of an error. We want to keep adequate forces and we want to keep as strong in our hearts and our heads as we do in our military, and then carry forward our policies, our firmness in supporting our rights, carrying out our responsibilities in the world, keeping our friends together, and remembering that we just simply cannot be always following someone else's lead. We have to take our own positive plan and follow it. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know how you could free anything with nuclear weapons. 
I can say this: the United States and its allies have announced their firm intention of preserving their rights and responsibilities with respect to Berlin. If any threat, or any push in the direction of real hostilities is going to occur, it's going to occur from the side of the Soviets. 
Now, if that would become reality, and I don't believe that anyone would be senseless enough to push that to the point of reality, then there will be the time to decide exactly what the allies would, in turn, expect to do.



57 - Radio and Television Report to the American People: Security in the Free World
March 16, 1959

It is West Berlin. In a turbulent world it has been, for a decade, a symbol of freedom. But recently its name has come to symbolize, also, the efforts of Imperialistic Communism to divide the free world, to throw us off balance, and to weaken our will for making certain of our collective security. 
Next, I shall talk to you about the state of our Nation's posture of defense and the free world's capacity to meet the challenges that the Soviets incessantly pose to peace and to our own security. First, West Berlin. 
Why has there developed a situation surrounding this city that poses another of the recurring threats to peace that bear the stamp of Soviet manufacture?
Let's begin with a brief review of recent history. 
We first acquired rights and responsibilities in West Berlin as a result of World War II. Even before the war ended, when the defeat and capitulation of Nazi Germany were in sight, the Allied Powers, including the Soviet Union, signed agreements defining the areas of occupation in Germany and Berlin which they would assume. 
As a result, Germany and the City of Berlin, were each divided into four zones, occupied by American, British, French, and Soviet troops, respectively. 
Under the wartime agreements I have mentioned, the Western Allies entered into occupation of West Berlin and withdrew our Armies from the Soviet Zone. Accordingly, the boundary of the Soviet Zone, like our presence in Berlin, was established upon the basis of these same agreements. 
Also by agreement among the occupying powers, the Western Allies-the United States, the United Kingdom, and France--were guaranteed free access to Berlin. 
Here in my office is a map of Germany. The light portion of the map is West Germany--the darker portion is East Germany. The lighter gray lanes are the air corridors to Berlin--and the dotted lines show both the main roads and railroads that give us access to the city. Notice that the City of Berlin is one hundred and ten miles inside East Germany; that is, it is one hundred and ten miles from the nearest boundary of West Germany. 
Here is the territory, now in East Germany that was taken by our Army in World War II and was turned over to the Russians by political agreement made before the end of the War. 
Now at the end of World War II our announced purpose and that of our wartime associates was the pacification and eventual unification of Germany under freedom. 
We jointly agreed to undertake this task. Ever since that time, the United States has continuously recognized the obligation of the Allied Governments under international law to reach a just peace settlement with Germany and not to prolong the occupation of Germany unnecessarily. 
The public record demonstrates clearly that such a settlement has been frustrated only by the Soviets. It quickly became evident that Soviet leaders were not interested in a free unified Germany, and were determined to induce or force the Western Powers to leave Berlin. 
Ten years ago Senator John Foster Dulles, now our great Secretary of State, described the basic purpose of the Soviet government. He said that purpose was, and now I am quoting: "no less than world domination, to be achieved by gaining political power successively in each of the many areas which had been afflicted by war, so that in the end the United States, which was openly called the main enemy, would be isolated and closely encircled." That is the completion of the quotation. 
The current Berlin effort of the Soviets falls within this pattern of basic purpose. 
The first instance of unusual pressure, dearly evidencing these purposes, came in 1948 when the Communists imposed a blockade to force the protecting Western troops out of Berlin and to starve the people of that City into submission. 
That plan failed. A free people and a dramatic airlift broke the back of the scheme. 
In the end the Communists abandoned the blockade and concluded an agreement in 1949 with the Western Powers, reconfirming our right of unrestricted access to the city. 
Then, last November, the Soviets announced that they intended to repudiate these solemn obligations. They once more appear to be living by the Communist formula that "Promises are like pie crusts, made to be broken." 
The Soviet Government has also announced its intention to enter into a peace treaty with the East German puppet regime. The making of this treaty, the Soviets assert, will deny our occupation rights and our rights of access. It is, of course, clear that no so-called "peace treaty" between the Soviets and the East German regime can have any moral or legal effect upon our fights. 
The Soviet threat has since been repeated several times, accompanied by various and changing suggestions for dealing with the status of the city. Their proposals have included a vague offer to make the Western part of Berlin--though not the Eastern part, which the Soviets control-a so-called "free city." 
It is by no means clear what West Berlin would be free from, except perhaps from freedom itself. It would not be free from the ever present danger of Communist domination. No one, certainly not the two. million West Berliners, can ignore the cold fact that Berlin is surrounded by many divisions of Soviet and Eastern German troops and by territory governed by authorities dedicated to eliminating freedom from the area. 
Now a matter of principle, the United States cannotaccept the asserted right of any government to break, by itself, solemn agreements to which we, with others, are parties. But in the Berlin situation, beth free people and principle are at stake. What, then, are the fundamental choices we have in this situation? 
First, of course, there is the choice which the Soviet rulers themselves would like us to make. They hope that we can be frightened into abdicating our rights--which are indeed responsibilities--to help establish a just and peaceful solution to the German problem--rights which American and Allied soldiers purchased with their lives. 
We have no intention of forgetting our rights or of deserting a free people. Soviet rulers should remember that free men have, before this, died for so-called "scraps of paper" which represented duty and honor and freedom. 
The shirking of our responsibilities would solve no problems for us. First, it would mean the end of all hopes for a Germany under government of German choosing. It would raise, among our friends, the most serious doubts about the validity of all the international agreements and commitments we have made with them in every quarter of the globe. One result would be to undermine the mutual confidence upon which our entire system of collective security is founded. 
This, the Soviets would greet as a great victory over the West. 
Obviously, this choice is unacceptable to us. 
The second choice which the Soviets have compelled us to. face, is the possibility of war. 
Certainly, the American and Western peoples do not want war. The whole world knows this. Global conflict under modern conditions could mean the destruction of civilization. The Soviet rulers, themselves, are well aware of this fact. 
But all history has taught us the grim lesson that no nation has ever been successful in avoiding the terrors of war by refusing to defend its rights--by attempting to placate aggression. 
Whatever risk of armed conflict may be inherent in the present Berlin situation, it was deliberately created by the Soviet rulers. 
Moreover, the justice of our position is attested by the fact that it is ardently supported with virtual unanimity by the people of West Berlin. 
The risk of war is minimized if we stand firm. War would become more likely if we gave way and encouraged a rule of terrorism rather than a rule of law and order. Indeed, this is the core of the peace policy which we are striving to carry out around the world. In that policy is found the world's best hope for peace. 
Now our final choice is negotiation, even while we continue to provide for our security against every threat. We are seeking meaningful negotiation at this moment. The United States and its allies stand ready to talk with Soviet representatives at any time and underanycircumstances which offer prospects of worth-while results. 
We have no selfish material aims in view. We seek no domination over others--only a just peace for the world and particularly, in this instance, for the people most involved. 
We are ready to consider all proposals which may help to reassure and will take into account the European peoples most concerned. 
We are willing to listen to new ideas and are prepared to present others. We will do everything within our power to bring about serious negotiations and to make these negotiations meaningful.
Let us remind ourselves once again of what we cannot do. 
We cannot try to purchase peace by forsaking two million free people of Berlin. 
We cannot agree to any permanent and compulsory division of the German nation, which would leave central Europe a perpetual powder mill, even though we are ready to discuss with all affected nations any reasonable methods for its eventual unification. 
We cannot recognize the asserted right of any nation to dishonor its international agreements whenever it chooses. If we should accept such a contention the whole process of negotiation would become a barren mockery. 
We must not, by weakness or irresolution, increase the risk of war. 
Finally, we cannot, merely for the sake of demonstrating so-called "flexibility" accept any agreement or arrangement which would undermine the security of the United States and its Allies. 
The Soviet note of March 2nd appears to be a move toward negotiation on an improved basis. We would never negotiate under a dictated time limit or agenda, or on other unreasonable terms. We are, with our Allies, however, in view of the changed tone of the Soviet note, concerting a reply to that note. 
It is my hope that thereby all of us can reach agreement with the Soviets on an early meeting at the level of foreign ministers. 
Assuming developments that justify a summer meeting at the Summit, the United States would be ready to participate in that further effort. 
Our position, then, is this: we will not retreat one inch from our duty. We shall continue to exercise our right of peaceful passage to and from West Berlin. We will not be the first to breach the peace; it is the Soviets who threaten the use of force to interfere with such free passage. We are ready to participate fully in every sincere effort at negotiation that will respect the existing rights of all and their opportunity to live in peace. 
Today's Berlin difficulty is not the first stumbling block that International Communism has placed along the road to peace. The world has enjoyed little relief from tension in the past dozen years. As long as the Communist empire continues to seek world domination we shall have to face threats to the peace, of varying character and location. We have lived and will continue to live in a period where emergencies manufactured by the Soviets, follow one another like beads on a string. 
Whatever the length of that period, we shall have to remain continuously ready to repel aggression, whether it be political, economic, or military. Every day our policies of peace will be subjected to test. We must have steadiness and resolution, and firm adherence to our own carefully thought-out policies. 
We must avoid letting fear or lack of confidence turn us from the course that self-respect, decency, and love of liberty point out. To do so would be to dissipate the creative energies of our people upon whom our real security rests. This we will never do. 
My friends, such assertions as these are simply not true. They are without foundation. It is not likely, however--and this is indeed fortunate--that such assertions will lead the Soviet Union to miscalculate our true strength. 



67 - The President's News Conference
March 25, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, first of all, the first part of your question--all of this exercise of negotiating and dealing with the Soviets has as its basic purpose the reduction of tension. We have been, the free world has been, trying to bring that about for a good many years. 
Now, with respect to conditions laid down in the notes, as you people well know, all of these notes have to be coordinated with our friends, including NATO. This has now been done. Our note will be sent very shortly; and very quickly after that, as quickly as it can be done, it will be released. 
So I would suggest for the actual letter of our intentions there is a place to find it, and very quickly. 
Now, I just will say this one thing: I have been talking for some years now about the convictions that I hold with respect to this whole business. I have never changed them; I don't expect to change them, unless there is something cataclysmic or, let us say, unexpected, rather, that comes along and that would bring some change. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I can't go into any detail of that, because this is exactly, of course, what the exercise of coordinating with our friends has to do with. We have to be with them as a unit when we make any kind of proposals. There will be many proposals made, but I couldn't discus them now
THE PRESIDENT. I have been questioned in many quarters about the use of that word. I thought that it was clear, and I meant when I used it only this, that there was progress that justified it. 
Now, if somebody else has taken a different meaning, or a different possibility, contingency, it is different from what I had at the moment I made the talk

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't know that--first of all let's start with this. I believe they did sign a treaty and filed it with the United Nations some time back, several months. I believe that any signature by itself would not necessarily have any effect particularly because of this. We are talking about actions, and we are quite sure and clear in our own minds that the mere signing of a new peace treaty, or a so-called peace treaty, or a codicil to that treaty, an addendum, would not in itself vitiate our rights which we are determined to protect. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it is perfectly clear that he is the only man who has the opportunity, let us say, the authority really to negotiate. If you had anyone rise with whom you were negotiating--except in detail, or method or procedure or agenda, things like that--I really believe that the only way that man could do anything would be to be on the telephone all the time with Moscow. So in effect you would be negotiating directly with Moscow. And I think that there is probably some validity to the argument that if you are going to talk really substantive measures, and hope to get some agreement that can be valid on both sides, considered valid on both sides, that he has got to get into the picture pretty well. 
I want to make this very clear. This doesn't mean that anyone can command anybody else to come to a summit meeting. You can't bluff them or blackmail them or anything else. This is to be a meeting, if there is one, of heads of government who are acting voluntarily and because of their beliefs in the possibilities, with some kind of grounds for such a belief, that real measures can be discussed profitably by all of us.
THE PRESIDENT. I could be mistaken, but I am sure that they filed a document with the United Nations some months back. If they didn't, I will correct it and make an apology for my error. But that is what I remember. 
Now, they do, of course, talk about a new one, but that has a different kind of meaning, because some of the things that were in that one, as I understand it, they now want to put in another one, so they call it a new one, I guess




70 - Remarks at the Opening Session of the Ministerial Meeting of the North Atlantic Council.
April 2, 1959

We shall always keep open the door of honest discussion--even to those whose creed is world domination. Our governments conduct continuous--almost daily--discussions and negotiations with the Soviet Union. We use regular diplomatic establishments, special committees, organs of the United Nations, and occasional meetings of responsible political leaders. No means are overlooked that give rise to promise of constructive results. 
We shall continue these negotiations and discussions. We shall continue to make concrete and realistic proposals for disarmament, for a just solution of the problems of Germany, for European security, and for cooperation in the newly-opening realm of outer space. 
Although we shall always avoid substituting illusion for reality, we shall continue to strive for a more general and far-reaching, but always practical, settlement of differences with the Soviets. 
The need, as we reach for a lasting peace with justice, is the abandonment of the Communist purpose of world domination. 
We shall never cease to encourage such a change. Meanwhile, we must be prepared during the years ahead to live in a world in which tension and bickering between free nations and the Soviets will be daily experiences. So, to live confidently, freedom's greatest requirement is unity--the unity which is the very life-blood of NATO
On this base we propose to build the road leading toward lasting peace and universal justice. 
Building this road will require courage--courage to stand fast in the face of menace and of threats. 
It will require sacrifice--sacrifice needed to maintain and improve our collective strength over a long period of time. 
It will require perseverance--perseverance to explore every avenue which offers reasonable hope for just solutions to the issues between ourselves and the Soviet Union. 
All these qualities the free nations possess in full measure--we must never tire or weaken in our practice of them. 
Those who respect the dignity of man will not flinch before the magnitude of the task. Rather they will prove once again that greatness of spirit and love of liberty will overcome the forces of atheistic materialism and coercion and give to all the nations, under God, the blessings of security, along with a just and durable peace



87 - Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the United States Chamber of Commerce.
April 27, 1959

I cannot re-emphasize too strongly that in our struggle against Soviet imperialism we must have firm friends and willing allies. We must, through patient work, promote collective growth and strength. Aside from the material assistance we may provide through weapons, and private and public loans, we must help to produce a freer flow of world trade. We must do this without prejudice to our national security and without inflicting undue hardship on our local producers



89 - The President's News Conference
April 29, 1959

They showed me the pictures of the biggest and presumably the best machine the Russians have, and I believe it is a half mile in diameter, but our people have come to the conclusion that a linear accelerator is better than any other

THE PRESIDENT. Well, if I did, I will say this, it was strictly unintentional. 
Now, I made a statement on the advice of the scientists who believed it was an advance, and it would be, since it was supposed to be in the peaceful field of space exploration, it would be really wrong not--to withdraw recognition of that accomplishment. 
Now you say I did it before it was accomplished. Not as far as the scientists told me
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Drummond, here is the basic issue there, as I see it: that proposal was made on the theory that the veto would be removed, that there would be no Eastern insistence upon the veto, and therefore the only problems to solve would be how many of these free inspections could be made. But so long as the Soviets insist upon the veto with respect to the composition of the committees, inspecting teams, their right to go inspect within the number, then there is no sense whatsoever, as I see it, of talking about the number that will be allowed. 
Now, the difference between that and what we propose and with the British concurrence was--let us stop atmospheric tests, tests in the atmosphere, because the simplest kind of system could assure that our present methods could be reinforced with only a few stations, and there would be no teams driving around. 
But until you have the authority to do this without the veto, then the number thing doesn't come in at all



94 - The President's News Conference
May 5, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. No. I have no reason to believe anything of this matter. Actually we are unaware of the fate of these individuals other than, of course, the six that were returned after their death. But I did, on a very personal basis, direct the Ambassador to take this issue again to Mr. Khrushchev. 1 
On instructions from the President, the United States Ambassador to the Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, Llewellyn E. Thompson, today had an interview with the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R., Nikita Khrushchev, in connection with the case of the United States Air Force C-130 transport plane that was shot down by Soviet fighter aircraft over Soviet Armenia on September 2, 1958. The Ambassador's representation dealt particularly with the President's concern for the fate of the eleven members of the crew who are still missing and unaccounted for
Certainly I hope that there will be some progress, and actually, all of us do know that within the Soviet regime there is only one man who can talk authoritatively. 
Therefore, if there is anything that gives enlarged hope for decreasing tensions in the world, then I think a summit meeting would become almost a--its occurrence would be a foregone conclusion. 
Now, there is no point, at this moment, of trying to lay out in detail what will be our approach. Secretary Herter on Thursday night is making a report to the Nation in which he will discuss our propositions and proposals and attitudes in some detail, and I think that it would be best to wait for that
THE PRESIDENT. I discussed this Mideast situation and some of its intricacies last week, and I doubt that at the moment I am prepared to take any specific thing like stepping in to help with the Aswan Dam, and indeed, to do anything other than to say we are trying to be fair with everybody. We are not trying to promote personal quarrels or personal prestige, as such. We are trying to be fair in our relationships with these nations and to get every single one of them to recognize that in freedom and independence they have got a greater chance to go ahead in the realization of their own aspirations, rather than if they try to accept too closely an association with the Soviets




102 - The President's News Conference
May 13, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Arrowsmith, it is very difficult to see behind someone else's forehead, and you are not quite sure what they are thinking. 
For ourselves, we have been very anxious to have any negotiations that might be called to be fruitful, to avoid using them as propaganda platforms and merely as ways and means of repeating our story or anybody else's story to the world. And this struggle, of this particular kind, does seem to have some of that purpose behind it. However, I am very hopeful that we can get some of this behind us now very quickly and get to the business of fruitful negotiations on the problems that both sides have agreed are important


THE PRESIDENT. You are really getting into the field of speculation. 
No, I have not been contacted by anyone about the possibility of Mr. Khrushchev coming here on his own. I have heard of messages from some cities in this country who are very anxious to have a summit meeting, and they are sending invitations to everybody in the world, including me, to come to this country. But there has been nothing official whatsoever about it. As a matter of fact, one of the purposes of these foreign ministers is to decide, if there is to be a summit meeting, what will be its location and its timing. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the fair is there. But as I said, on that one, no one spoke to me about it, no one has spoken to me until you have about it.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I am not going to try to recall my exact words, but I did say here would be something that needed real study, because it is a difficult one, and I had not heard it until, well, a few weeks back. 
We have been studying this thing, and we say that any limitation of the inspections would have to be conformed to the necessities required by scientific data. I am giving you exactly the advice given me by my scientists; they say until this thing is examined in all of its elements, you cannot possibly state or fix the number of these examinations that would be necessary, because how many stations, where they would be, how they are situated, what their instrumentation and everything else, all that has to be done before you can figure out at all any reasonable or any, you might say, appropriate number of on-site inspections. 
So, my ability to make an estimate of what is going to be agreed or not agreed is just nil. 
THE PRESIDENT. You people love to ask "if" questions, don't you? [Laughter] 
I think that you ought to wait until we hear something about it, and then see what the situation is



123 - The President's News Conference
June 3, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the first answer is no, there has not been any detectable progress that to my mind would justify the holding of a summit meeting. 
Now, I think I have expressed before my readiness to interpret satisfactory progress or define satisfactory progress rather liberally, because it would be unrealistic to believe that the foreign ministers could make a number of agreements that would be significant to the world and would of themselves promote a much more peaceful situation in the world. This is because these foreign ministers are, after all, acting for someone else, delegates of their governments, and these matters have to be brought back and studied carefully. 
Nevertheless, I think that as the very least, we should expect, as Mr. Herter said in his opening statement, that we could see where we are apart on issues, whether we could narrow these gaps, and whether we could define the areas where it was going to be worth while for us to confer; that is, at the summit. 
This would be, say, at least a decent working paper. But at the same time this crisis was brought about, the crisis that called for a summit meeting or which was used by some to callfor a summit meeting was by the unilateral action of the Soviets with respect to Berlin. Therefore, there certainly should be some agreement that until a reunification of Germany could, in the future, be brought about, there should be a clear commitment that we will not be impeded in exercising our rights and privileges with respect to West Berlin; things of that kind. That, I would say, is specific. 
Now, there are other ways, of course, in which there could be progress in the way of opening up contacts, exchanges of persons, of ideas, of books, and press comments, and all that kind of thing, some of the gaps into the Iron Curtain, back and forth. 
Now, with respect to the speculating as to what the Soviets want, whether or not they want a summit meeting more or less than they did some months back, I don't know. 
I will say this: some of the statements made by Mr. Khrushchev were certainly not calculated to ease tensions and to promote, you might say, a relaxed atmosphere for the conduct of negotiations at Geneva.
THE PRESIDENT. I say that until the Germans participate themselves, as a whole, in settling these problems we ought not to have any more questions or difficulty about the Berlin question, that's what I mean. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't like to call it condition. I would just say this: I don't see how the head of any self-respecting government can go to an international conference in response to any kind of thing that can be interpreted as a threat.
THE PRESIDENT. Well, you will remember, in that letter I said that what we are aiming for is a much broader agreement that would contemplate control of all types of bans--above the atmosphere, in it, and under the surface. 
Now, what I did propose: I said, could we not make a start in the atmospheric thing, which would have two or three things. One, there would be no increase in the pollution of the air, such as it is, and it would be rather simple to detect. Therefore there would be very, very minor arrangements in inspectional systems as compared to what you would have to have in a broader base. But just exactly what turn the June the 8th opening will have, I don't know





130 - Remarks at the Graduation Exercises of the Foreign Service Institute.
June 12, 1959

Because no nation, even one so directed and operated as is the Soviets', can dominate all and be the controlling factor. Of course, a democracy would not even attempt it because it would be completely antithetical to their own conceptions and doctrines



132 - The President's News Conference
June 17, 1959

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Belair, I don't recall that I put my conclusion and my statement of a couple of weeks ago on the basis just of Berlin. I said that if a foreign ministers meeting made such progress as to give to any reasonable person the belief that that progress would make a summit meeting fruitful, then I would be glad to go; because certainly I am not going to indulge just prejudice or preconceived notions or anything else to such an extent that it will stand in the way of some kind of tiny step toward easing tensions in the world. 
So, if I did tie that directly to the Berlin bit, I did it only as an example. If there is any kind of reasonable progress that justifies a summit meeting, why of course I would never decline the opportunity
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I hadn't thought of it as that, as a mechanism for reopening negotiations. 
I would say this: we would never lose any opportunity that would arise through the contact of any responsible official of any government with his opposite number or with the other government to bring about some advance. I understand, for example, Mr. Kozlov is asking to see me, and I certainly shall make an engagement some way so he can come to see me
THE PRESIDENT. You've asked a question that has about as many technicalities in it as I can imagine. 
Now, this decoupling is, as you know, the possibility of setting an explosion off, the full effect of which is not communicated to instruments that are related around the whole country. 
Coupling with those reports is the production of a new technique that makes the possibility of detecting now very much better than it was when we made the first settlement at Geneva. 
Now, this means that the very time when you have found out that some of the possibilities of concealment have grown up, the possibilities of detection have gone up at about an equal rate, apparently, so that you have a tremendously difficult technical problem to solve if you're going to get equality in this business. 
But I do say this: we would be foolish if we expect 100 percent from any system. There is no system, whether it be defensive or detection or intelligence or planning or anything else, that is 100 percent perfect. What we do have to do is to refine the process to the point where we minimize risks and indeed bring them down below the level where they could be truly dangerous to our country





















































