MID 296801, US v Canada, 29 jun to 29-Jul-79 to 31-Aug-79



Tokyo Economic Summit Conference Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters. 
June 29, 1979

We, the Canadians, and the Japanese also adopted goals. Our 1985 goal for imports will not exceed the lower of either 1977 or 1979, no more than 8.5 million barrels per day

But in my opinion, the deep commitment to restrain imports, the deep commitment to go to new forms of energy-synthetic fuels, the liquefaction and gasification of oil [coal], oil derived from oil shale, tar sands in Canada, an increased use of coal, a commitment to solar energy—we'll do this in an accelerating way because of the newly aroused concern and commitment on the part of American people and the Congress. And this will be enhanced because it will be .a multinational effort as well

THE PRESIDENT. I think you'll see it is. In the past, it's been a difficult thing for an individual nation, highly vulnerable to the interruption of oil supplies, to make any sort of critical comment about OPEC action. You've observed that yourself. But the fact that Japan and Italy, for instance, who have practically no energy sources of their own, combined with France and Germany, Great Britain, Canada, and us—to make this strong statement, I think, is a very significant move. What the OPEC nations have done with their 60-percent increase in prices in the last 6 months has obviously had a disconcerting effect on the very strong industrialized nations. In some cases, it's had an almost devastating effect on the developing nations of the world



The President's Trip to Japan and the Republic of Korea Remarks During a Background Briefing Given by Administration Officials for Reporters on Board Air Force One. 
July 1, 1979

And I think that all of the countries assembled in Tokyo recognized that we have a special advantage in our country in having some reserves. Germany has no oil. France has no appreciable oil or coal. Germany has pretty good coal supplies. Great Britain has both coal and oil. We have coal, oil; obviously, we have tremendous resources in shale. Canada has diminishing, rapidly diminishing supplies of oil, tremendous potential in tar sands. So, each country is so different, one from another—Japan, almost completely dependent on imported energy. So, we had a very serious problem to address


Kansas City, Missouri Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Association of Counties. 
July 16, 1979

We are working very closely with Mexico and Canada. The total quantity of production and export of oil and gas from Mexico is obviously a decision to be made by the people and the Government of Mexico. But we now purchase more than 80 percent of all the oil exported by Mexico—more than 80 percent. We are now negotiating a new agreement to purchase the natural gas which Mexico will be willing to export. 
Although Canada's oil production will be steadily dropping during the next few years, we will continue to share hydro, electric power and other energy sources with our neighbor to the north. One major project will be the new pipeline to be built from Alaska through Canada to bring natural gas to the lower 48 States. 
By 1985 Alaskan and Canadian natural gas can displace almost 700,000 barrels of imported oil per day. The North Slope producers have dragged their feet in helping to finance a pipeline needed to bring that gas to market. I've instructed the Secretary of Energy to call them in and get them going, and I will insist personally that this gas pipeline be built without further delay. 
We are and we will continue to be a good customer, a good neighbor, and a good trading partner with both Mexico and with Canada.


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
July 27, 1979

We anticipate that over a period of time that many of the New England homes that are presently almost exclusively dependent on coal [oil] 3 will be shifting toward natural gas as a heat source, and we hope to get some hydropower and other sources of energy from Canada across the border. We're pursuing that as well


Atlanta, Georgia Remarks at the Presidential Energy Technology Seminar. 
August 30, 1979

It comes up in the mid-Atlantic region, the Baltimore Canyon region, into water that's only 6,000 feet deep. It lies there under sediments that are themselves about 6,000 feet deep. The reef is about 20,000 feet thick in the region, which means, of course, since the reef always forms at sea level, that while the reef was forming, the sea floor sank by 20,000 feet, and the sediment accumulated as it did so. The reef is about 15 miles wide in this area; it's 150 miles long, and of course, it keeps going out of the area in both directions, since it runs intermittently all the way down from Mexico to Canada.

Then there's a gap in here, and then we can trace the reef—fair continuity, it goes out here and it's lost. And here it is off the east coast of the United States and is last seen going off Canada



