MID 390001, US v Canada,  12 oct to 11-Nov-89 to 11-Dec-89
Search “Canad”



The President's News Conference in San Jose, Costa Rica
October 28, 1989

But I sensed an urgency by President Sarney. I can identify with it, and we do want to be helpful. I had a chance to talk with him last night. I think he's very pleased we came. I think he was very pleased we are not, in the United States or, indeed, Canada, neglecting our friends in this hemisphere. So, I left with a pretty upbeat feeling -- not a diminished feeling of the importance of his problem but in terms of the hemispheric solidarity, you might say. But your having phrased the question that way, I want to be sure we're not missing a signal with him


The President's News Conference
October 31, 1989
The President. I think what we've got to do is educate the Canadians if they feel that way, because that's not true. That is not true, and to suggest that it's true, that our health care system is only -- that simply shows -- I don't know who those officials were, but it was never raised with me by the Prime Minister. 
The President. We've got a lot of problems. We've got a lot of problems. 
The President. Well, that's a point I'd argue

Remarks to the Organization of American States
November 14, 1989

I will say this, that the OAS seems to be a very special organization. I think Canada's addition, as I said down there, is a very healthy thing for the Organization. We have so much in common, and we have special relationships. And if we properly exercise the OAS, those relationships will not be taken for granted.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony in Brussels
December 3, 1989

The modern Atlantic alliance was born at sea. It was on a battleship off the coast of Canada that Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met during Europe's darkest hours -- great leaders, a rendezvous at sea, rendezvous with destiny. The legacy of that meeting became known as the Atlantic Charter, significant not for its details but for its vision. And it spoke of a day when all peoples in all nations would enjoy freely to choose their form of government and live lives rich with opportunity and hope. It spoke of a day when nations would resolve their differences at the negotiating table, not on the field of battle


The President's News Conference in Brussels
December 4, 1989

The President. Well, if you want to project out 100 years, or take some years off of that, you can look to a utopian day when there might not be. But as I pointed out to them, that day hasn't arrived; and they agree with me. And so, the United States must stay involved. What we don't want to do is send the signal of the decoupling of the United States and Canada from NATO, particularly at this highly sensitive time. And Mr. Gorbachev understood that. He made that point to me





