MID 417401, US v. Russia
June 16 to July 16, 1997 -  Feb 15, 1998



Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Dinner
June 16, 1997

Now, I know we've got a lot more to lose, you would argue, than they do. But no great nation has ever had a multiracial, multiethnic, integrated society. The Russians are doing a good job, actually, of trying to preserve their democracy with a whole lot of different ethnic groups. And they had that unfortunate difficulty in Chechnya, but there are a lot of Chechnyas over there where they don't have difficulty. But they live apart, physically apart, and normally in distinct, what we would call, States. Here we are, together


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto of Japan in Denver, Colorado
June 19, 1997

President Clinton. Yes, and I have discussed it on several occasions in the past, always urging Russia to try to resolve this matter with Japan. I believe it's very much in the interest of both Russia and Japan to resolve this matter and to build a strong partnership. 
The United States would feel much better about the future of the world knowing that Japan and Russia have the kind of partnership in the East that we have just tried to establish between Russia and Europe and the United States from NATO in the West. And obviously, there will have to be some plan for resolving this, but it will have to be worked out by the Prime Minister and President Yeltsin. But I have raised it before on several occasions


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Boris Yeltsin of Russia in Denver
June 20, 1997

President Clinton. Well, Russia is fully included. This is the first time we've ever had a meeting where the Russians were here from the beginning to the end. And we also have another happy development today: When we were in Helsinki I pledged to President Yeltsin that I would do my best to see Russia be admitted into the Paris Club within the year, and Russia and the Paris Club have just completed their negotiations, which means that now Russia will be a partner with the other members in trying to help promote the global economic growth by relieving the burden of the debt on developing countries that—[inaudible]—so what you see here is a sweeping—[inaudible]—Russia—[inaudible]—networks in the world in a way that is very positive for the rest of us. 
And I must say, in the last 5 years, as Russian participation has steadily increased here, we have seen the agenda of this group broaden dramatically, and because Russia is a partner, we can talk about, for example, what we can do together to prevent the inappropriate spread of nuclear materials, and we can work together on a whole range of other options. 
So I'm very positive about this and very pleased with this summit and pleased with the emergence of Russia as a leader in all these world institutions. It's a great tribute I think to President Yeltsin's leadership and to the commitment of the Russian people to democracy and reform.
President Clinton. Let me say that until you asked that question, no one had ever suggested to me that there would ever be a time when Russia would not be a full partner in this Group of Eight. 
Let me just remind you that over the last few years, as the participation of Russia in this group has grown to this moment, when for the first time we are here together from beginning to end and participating in only one press conference together and speaking with one voice— and as I'm sure you probably know, Russia has reached an agreement to join the Paris Club— it has enabled this body to go from a purely economic focus to deal with the common challenges that we have in the world we're about to enter and the one we face today. 
For example, the work we're doing in nuclear cooperation would be impossible if Russia were not our partner here. And there are many other things that we're going to do together. So I think that this is a cause for celebration not only in Russia but in the other countries here. 
Let me just say one final thing. I consider this day and all these things that are happening that are positive a tribute, first of all, to the support of the Russian people for democracy and reform and, second, to the unusual combination of vision and persistence that President Yeltsin has displayed over so many years. It's quite a hopeful moment for the world, I think, and I give him a lot of credit.


Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Jacques Chirac of France and an Exchange With Reporters in Denver
June 20, 1997

President Clinton. Let me say, first of all, I'm delighted to see President Chirac again, and I want to compliment him again on his leadership in Paris recently when we signed the NATO-Russia Founding Act. I have asked for his indulgence so that I can make a brief statement about the settlement which was announced in the tobacco case.

President Clinton. Yes. Before you do, let me say, first, I want to welcome President Chirac to the United States again and thank him for the wonderful job that he did in hosting the NATO meeting in Paris where we announced the historic partnership with Russia. I would also like to thank him for the work that we are doing together in so many parts of the world and especially on behalf of the American people to thank him for the help that France gave in the evacuation of American citizens in Brazzaville. We were very grateful for that


Remarks at the Opening of the First Working Session of the Summit of the Eight in Denver
June 21, 1997

I'm very pleased to welcome my fellow leaders to Denver as we open this Summit of the Eight. And I want to say a special welcome to our friend President Yeltsin, who joins us for the first time from the beginning to the end of this meeting. Russia's growing role in the shared world of market democracies reflects the progress and the potential of this age


The President's Radio Address
June 21, 1997
Today I want to talk about why this summit is important to our Nation and our people and what we'll be working to achieve here. The leaders of the United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, Japan, the European Union, and Russia will gather shoulder to shoulder around the table. The very fact that we're gathering speaks volumes about the world today. Our homelands are thousands of miles apart, but the rise of the global economy, spurred by revolutions in technology, transportation, and communications has brought us all closer together. And the fact that this is the very first of these annual summits where a democratically elected leader of Russia joins us from beginning to end reflects just how far we've come from the days of the cold war. This moment of possibilities creates vast opportunities for all our people. Ideas, goods and services, technology, and capital fly across borders faster than ever, enriching our lives in many ways and contributing to our prosperity. 
We'll also continue to advance our fight against new forces of destruction that have no regard for borders. Last year, when we met in Lyons, France, we agreed on a series of measures to combat terrorism and organized crime. Since then we've actually implemented concrete steps, from improving airline security to denying safe haven for criminals. We've also made significant progress in bolstering the safety and security of nuclear materials, something that simply wouldn't have been possible without Russia as a partner. Together, the eight are working to tighten the management of plutonium from dismantled nuclear warheads to keep them from falling into the wrong hands. To better prevent and investigate nuclear smuggling incidents, we set up a rapid response network, stepped up law enforcement intelligence and customs cooperation, and improved our nuclear forensics capabilities so that we can identify the sources of smuggled nuclear materials. Soon, more than 20 additional countries in Europe and central Asia will be joining us in these common endeavors



Remarks at the Presentation of the Final Communique of the Summit of the Eight in Denver
June 22, 1997

Russia's role here at the summit reflects the great strides that Russia has made in its historic transformation. We look forward to Russia's continued leadership and participation, and we thank President Yeltsin for all he has done


The President's News Conference in Denver
June 22, 1997

And in all of these efforts, we believe we are stronger because we now have Russia as a partner. I'm pleased that for the first time Russia took part in our summit from the start and that this week we reached agreement on Russia's joining the Paris Club for creditor nations—evidence of Russia's emergence as a full member of the community of democracies

The President. Yes, I think—well, first of all, I think the only appropriate United States role is to try to talk to each party on behalf of the other from the point of view of being friends with both. That is, this is an area where we plainly have no personal, tangible interest of any kind. We have no territorial interest, we have no financial interest. Our only interest is seeing two friends of ours get along, and trying to stabilize one more—the future of the Asia-Pacific region by removing one more deterrent to an alliance between a free and democratic Russia and our great ally in Japan. 
So I have talked to both Prime Minister Hashimoto and President Yeltsin about this on several occasions. They are beginning to talk about it among themselves. They will have to work it out. But, obviously, I'm very hopeful that it can be worked out
The President. Let me say, this year ourcommitment was to have Russia be a complete member of the Group of the Eight and to have the old G-7 meet only on issues that we had unique responsibility for because of our present financial standing. So I think it's fair that all of us look forward to the day when we don't even have to do that. 
But, just for example, we've got this project going on to help Ukraine deal with Chernobyl, and Russia is not responsible for what we committed to do before, nor would it be fair to ask Russia to bear any responsibility for that. So we had to meet and discuss it, and we did. There was nothing secret or esoteric about it; we just had to do what we were required to do, and we did that. 
But I think you will see continuing integration of Russia into full partnership. The next thing I want to see is Russia into the WTO, and we're working on that. So we'll just keep working at it, and as long as Russia keeps moving as it is under President Yeltsin, and those reformers and the people of Russia keep supporting the direction they have, I think that you'll see more and more good things ahead. 
This gentleman has been here a long time, and then this gentleman, and then we'll move over here. 
The President. I think, yes, they're ready politically and ready economically in terms of what's—like the Paris Club membership. But I think there are still some things that the old G-7 have to do that it wouldn't even be fair to ask Russia to participate in, like this Chernobyl thing that I just mentioned. So there will be a smaller and smaller role for the seven as we go forward, and a bigger and bigger role—basically, this time we had a Summit of the Eight, with a small, little afterthought for what the seven still had to do to clean up our old business. But I think that, with great prosperity, I think you'll see any last little dividing line blurring. 
Yes, sir. These three gentlemen there are fine. Just take them in any order. 
The President. Well, I hope that Russia will change in two ways that I would consider to be immensely positive. One is, I think the participation of Russia here, just like the NATO-Russia Founding Act, increases the chances that we can maintain stability in Europe in the 20th century and that we can deal with any problems that arise like we're dealing with them in Bosnia, to prevent the outbreak of widespread war in Europe. 
The second thing I think is very positive is Russia, don't forget, is also a great Pacific power. So in bringing Russia into this partnership along with Japan, you will see a little more emphasis, I think, on what we can do as a group to deal with what's going on in Asia in preserving stability and freedom and opportunity there. 
So in those ways, I think you'll see the texture of this change. And you could see it just in the way President Yeltsin operated here at this meeting, where I might say I thought he did an extraordinary job. 

Interview With European Television Journalists
July 3, 1997

The President. I wouldn't say that, but I think that it's important to note that we made an agreement with President Yeltsin to have an agreement between NATO and Russia that would make it crystal clear that NATO is no longer an organization designed to contain Russia; NATO is an organization designed to work with all free countries to respect the territorial integrity of its members, to protect the security of its members, and to work with its members and their allies, Russia, soon to be Ukraine, and those in the Partnership For Peace, on common security problems like the problem in Bosnia. 
I think the great contribution Boris Yeltsin has made to the integration of Europe is his willingness to say, Russia is not going to define its greatness in terms of territorial domination, Russia will define its greatness in terms of the achievements of its people and its partnerships with other countries. That was the contribution, that's what he did, and he deserves a lot of credit for that. 
Now, should we expand NATO in a way that is at least aware of the nationalist elements in Russia, the people that don't feel the same way? Of course we should. Should we be sensitive to that? Of course we should. But I think as NATO and Russia continue to work in partnership as we have in Bosnia, the continued expansion of NATO will not be seen as a threat to the Russian people but will be seen as something that reinforces our partnership and therefore makes the Russian people more secure
Jacques Chirac supported NATO expansion when some European leaders didn't. He was instrumental in getting the agreement with Russia. He was instrumental in forging our common position in Bosnia. All I can say is, I don't want America to dictate to Europe; I want—I have supported European integration. When other Americans were afraid of it, I said—because Europe would be bigger than the United States then—I said, "No, we want a democratic, free, strong, united Europe, and the next 100 years will be different than the last 100. Let it go. We have to work together." So that's the first thing

The President. Well, that's not just a vague promise. Keep in mind, the Baltics are in the Partnership For Peace. Let's not overlook that. That has been—I think one reason we have so many people wanting to be in NATO now is that the Partnership For Peace has been so successful. It is not an insignificant thing. The Euro-Atlantic alliance that we have with these Partnership For Peace countries will continue to be strengthened. 
And I think what we plan to do is to offer to work with the other European countries to try to—to set the stage for what we will do 2 years from now, and also to keep going into the future, to keep integrating these Partnership For Peace countries more and more and more into the military and other operations of NATO. So I think the Baltics should feel reassured by that. 
I worked very hard, you know, to work with President Yeltsin to get the Russian troops out of the Baltics, to keep them on the path of reform and democracy, and they've done very well. So I think they should be considered in the future like everyone else, and we should make that clear
I hope that eventually we will have many more countries in NATO and a much closer relationship with the countries beyond our borders that choose not to seek membership, like Russia



Remarks at a NATO Summit Sendoff by American Veterans
July 3, 1997

Next week we will take a historic step to secure that freedom for more people than ever before, at home and abroad, when we invite new democracies from Central Europe to join our alliance at the NATO Summit in Madrid. I thank those who have spoken before me for their support. Together with our efforts to build NATO's ties to Russia and to Ukraine, and through the Partnership For Peace with so many other of Europe's democracies, we're working to create a continent of Europe that is undivided, democratic, and at peace for the first time since nation-states appeared on that continent


Interview With David Gollust of the Voice of America
July 3, 1997

The President. Well, what I would hope is that all the allies would agree that we will take another look at this in 1999. As we complete the integration of the first members into NATO, we will take another look and see if we shouldn't take some more members in then. But in addition to that, let's not forget one thing: There is something that has already happened to increase their stability. The agreement with Russia increases their security and, even more important, their involvement in the Partnership For Peace, which is now going to be folded into this Euro-Atlantic alliance. That's a big deal for all these countries. That has been the great untold and underappreciated story of NATO, the fact that we put together this Partnership For Peace. There are two dozen countries in it. We do joint military exercises. They're involved with us in Bosnia. This is a huge deal. 
The President. Well again, we have tried to put them at ease in two ways. One is with their involvement in the Partnership For Peace, and the second is with the clear understanding that the door to membership would remain open on a long-term basis. And let me make a third point. The third is, when we made the agreement with Russia—the partnership with Russia is a clear signal that at least as long as this government is there and that President is there, they are not going to define their greatness in terms of their territorial dominance. Keep in mind, it was President Yeltsin that worked with us to withdraw the troops from the Baltics. So they got their—the Russian troops have left the Baltics in the tenure of my service here. 
So I think time is on our side, that we can't resolve all issues today but we are moving in the right direction and we have to let a little time pass on some of these issues. And they'll settle down and resolve themselves, I think, in a positive way. Could something bad happen to change the direction? Of course, it could happen. Is it likely? I don't think so



Remarks Following a Meeting With Members of Congress and the National Security Team and an Exchange With Reporters in Madrid, Spain
July 7, 1997

The President. Let me begin by saying that I and the leaders of my administration team here have just finished a very important meeting with the congressional delegation. We are here in Madrid on an historic mission, to fashion a new NATO for a new Europe that is undivided for the first time in history, for a new century. And that new NATO will include new members, new missions, and new ties to countries, including the very important one we concluded last month with Russia and the one we will solidify here with Ukraine

So we are moving Europe's democracies closer and closer together, and we'll continue to do it. And I don't think that the difference of opinion we've had over how many to let in now should obscure the overwhelming unanimity of the fact that NATO should expand, should take on new missions, and should maintain new alliances with Russia, with Ukraine, and with the members of the Partnership For Peace

The President. My position is that no European democracy should be excluded from ultimate consideration. And I have said that—I believe—my personal position is that should apply to Russia as well, that any democratic country in Europe prepared to make NATO's commitments—which includes recognizing the territorial integrity of every other democracy in Europe and every member of NATO and recognizing our mutual responsibility for one another's security—that anyone should be considered. That's always been the United States position, and that is mine. And I think it's the— I believe that's the position of every Republican and Democrat in this room. I believe it is


Remarks Following Discussions With President of the Government Jose Maria Aznar of Spain and an Exchange With Reporters in Madrid
July 7, 1997

President Clinton. Thank you very much. Mr. Prime Minister, it is wonderful to be back in Spain. And let me thank you again, along with the King and the Queen and the people of Spain, for the very warm hospitality that my family and I have experienced in Mallorca. And it is great to be back in Madrid and to be with you again. As you said, we had a very good visit in Washington in the springtime, and then we also saw each other in Paris when the NATO leaders met to forge our compact with Russia


Remarks to the Community at the United States Embassy in Madrid
July 8, 1997

We actually did three things here. First, we made NATO stronger by taking in new members and making clear that others will be allowed to come in the future. And we will continue to work to make sure we can meet the challenges of tomorrow. Second, we're working to adapt NATO internally to meet the new challenges of tomorrow, not the old ones of yesterday. And there will be more responsibility for Europeans in a separate security defense initiative. The third thing we're doing is reaching out to have more partners. You know we signed this historic agreement with Russia. Tomorrow there will be another historic signing with Ukraine. We have over two dozen countries in the Partnership For Peace that are working with us in Bosnia and in other ways, and they will be permitted to have a political arm through a partnership council that will give them a greater say over decisions that they will be expected to participate in.


Remarks at the Signing Ceremony for the NATO-Ukraine Charter in Madrid
July 9, 1997

Over the last 2 months, Ukraine's bold steps have made this continent more stable and more secure through its treaty of friendship and cooperation with Russia, its border agreement with Romania, its declaration of reconciliation with Poland. Now an open dialog and joint activities with NATO will help Ukraine solidify reform and strengthen stability throughout Europe. 
This charter reflects and reinforces the way this continent has changed. Ukraine has emerged from a century of struggle to pursue the highest standards of dignity and freedom. It is tackling tough economic reform. It has been a leader in reducing the nuclear danger. It has embarked on a course of peaceful integration with the community of democracies. NATO also has evolved to meet these new times with new missions, new members, a stronger Partnership For Peace, and now new partners, with Russia and, of course, today with Ukraine


The President's News Conference in Madrid
July 9, 1997

What happened here this week represents a lot of work over the last 3 1/2 years. Yesterday we made NATO stronger and ready to meet challenges of a new century by further streamlining its command structure and giving Europe a greater security role within NATO. Then in an historic turning point, we extended invitations to new members for the first time since Spain joined NATO 15 years ago, and we opened the door to other members in the future. Today we strengthened our ties to NATO's partners for peace and continued to reach out to a new one with the agreement with Ukraine. Together with the historic NATO-Russia Founding Act in Paris this spring, we now see a new and broader and deeper alliance

The President. Well, I think a lot of our campaign has already begun. Because of the widespread awareness at home because all of you are here and telling them at home what we just did, I think that a lot of the work has begun. But I do think, yes, that we all have a job to do, as Senator Roth said yesterday, but I and our administration have a job to do with the American people and with the United States Congress. 
I disagree that we are isolating Russia. You can only believe we're isolating Russia if you believe that the great power, territorial politics of the 20th century will dominate the 21st century and if you believe that NATO is inherently antagonistic to Russia's interests and that Russia inherently will have to try to exercise greater territorial domination in the next few years than it has in the last few. I dispute that. 
I believe that enlightened self-interest, as well as shared values, will compel countries to define their greatness in more constructive ways. And the threats that we will share that will be genuine threats to our security will compel us to cooperate in more constructive ways. Therefore, I think the fact that we had the NATO-Russia agreement first, that I went to Helsinki to see President Yeltsin before we actually even went— finalized where we were going with this—we got that done first, and we met in Paris and signed the agreement—it shows that NATO wants a constructive partnership with Russia as with all other democratic countries.
The President. I think on balance, they have made great progress in the last few years. You know this because we've talked about it a lot over the last few years, but we have spent a lot of time working with the Russians both to try to bring all the nuclear weapons and materials into a more concentrated area and get them out of the other Republics of the former Soviet Union and also to try to increase the safety of the materials. And the Russians have been quite constructive in our cooperation, and we've made a lot of progress. 
The first thing I asked when I saw that story about the arrest was whether or not they could have delivered the goods they were promising, which we don't know. Keep in mind, we have— our European friends, and Germany especially, a few years ago made a lot of arrests of people who were coming out of Russia with what they thought were nuclear materials, but none of them, as far as I know, could have been converted into weapons. That is, they were nuclearrelated materials from sites that people got away with, but the actual material that could be turned into a weapon was under sufficient security control that it wasn't out. 
We may not live in a zero-risk world, but I do believe we're doing well. And we will have to investigate this thoroughly to try to trace it back if there was a breakdown somewhere and, if so, what we have to do about it. But let me say, you just made the case for why I believe that we need to view our national interests in the same way. Obviously, the Russians and we here have the same interest. The Lithuanians have the same interest. Nobody wants this to be done. This is a violation of every nation's self-interest
The President. Well, first of all, you should read the charter because it shows about what we will do together with Ukraine. Secondly, I think it enhances the security of Ukraine, just as I believe the NATO-Russia agreement enhances Russia's security and enhances NATO's because it commits us to cooperation rather than conflict. 
In terms of what we would do in the Black Sea, let's note one thing, that Ukraine and Russia have recently agreed to settle their differences, which is a huge, positive thing from our point of view. To us, that was our biggest concern in the Black Sea, was the argument between Ukraine and Russia. And we're gratified that there's been an agreement that will resolve it when it's implemented. 
And in terms of what we do with our exercises, that depends upon what we think the appropriate thing is under the circumstances. And I have no evidence at the time which would cause me to change my position.


Remarks to the Citizens of Warsaw, Poland
July 10, 1997

NATO is doing its part, taking in new members, taking on new missions, working with new partners. Like Poland, we have reached out to Ukraine to help forge stability in Europe, and we are working with a new Russia as our partner in building a Europe in which every nation is free and every free nation joins in securing peace and stability for all. 
Now, as your President has said, you must continue to do your part. Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic will now become full members of our alliance, with the full responsibilities of membership: the responsibility to nurture and strengthen and defend your democracies because, as we in America know, after more than 200 years the struggle for democracy is never over, it must be fought every day; the responsibility to continue the remarkable transformation of your economies because, having known poverty, you know the true value of the prosperity you have only begun to achieve; the responsibility to reach out to all your neighbors, to the East as well as the West, including the people of Russia—you must continue to build in tolerance what others destroyed in hate; the responsibility to meet NATO's high military standards and to help to bear its cost, because true security requires strength and readiness. We know you are ready to share the burdens of defending freedom because you know the price of losing freedom


Remarks at a Dinner Hosted by President Aleksander Kwasniewski of Poland in Warsaw
July 10, 1997

NATO's decision to welcome Poland into the alliance is both a tribute and a challenge: a tribute to the people of this great nation who were the first to unleash the force of freedom from behind the Iron Curtain; who pioneered the difficult transition to an open society and an open market; who took the lead in reaching out to your neighbors in the Baltics, Russia, and the Ukraine; who sent your troops to give the people of Bosnia a chance to rebuild their broken land


The President's Radio Address
July 12, 1997
Good morning. I'm speaking to you from Copenhagen, Denmark, on the last day of what has been an historic week in Europe. For nearly 50 years, the NATO alliance has kept America and Western Europe secure in its peace. This week, we made NATO stronger to help keep America and all of Europe secure and at peace for the next 50 years by preparing NATO to take on new security challenges, reaching out to new partners like Russia and Ukraine, and inviting in new members, starting with Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic.



Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen of Denmark in Copenhagen
July 12, 1997

President Clinton. We've made a very clear statement that every democracy in Europe who wishes to join should be eligible to join at the appropriate time and that we will take regular reviews, the first one in 1999. And that applies to the Baltics as well as other countries. I must say that I want to thank the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister for taking the same position. We should remain open for business, if you will, for all, because we're trying to bring Europe together, including Russia and Ukraine and others, and that is our mission

President Clinton. It's a wonderful end to a busy week because we have had no stronger ally and freedom has had no stronger friend than Denmark over the last several years. Denmark has taken a leading role in NATO and is working for expansion and working for the resolution of our agreement with Russia and Ukraine and in Bosnia. Denmark has been with us in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Denmark has been in Albania, where we have not been. It is a remarkable country, and this is a fitting end of the week because this is the week in which together, we with our NATO allies, I believe went a very long way toward creating a Europe which will be free of war, which will have more freedom, and which will be undivided, really for the first time in its history


Remarks to the Citizens of Copenhagen
July 12, 1997

Now we must draw on your example to finish the work of overcoming one of the greatest barriers of our time, the division of Europe. And this past week we have shown we can do it not by force of arms but by the power of peace. This week we have seen the face of the new Europe. In Madrid, during our NATO Summit, we saw 44 countries from all corners of the continent come together to forge a common future. We saw the most successful defensive alliance in history reach out its hand to new members and extend its hand to Ukraine and to Russia, now our partners in building a bright future


The President's News Conference
August 6, 1997
In these past months, we have seen how the politics of the vital center can work to make progress on many of our most difficult problems. We ratified the Chemical Weapons Convention, a landmark treaty that will protect our soldiers and our citizens from the threat of poison gas. We reached agreement in Madrid to open the doors of NATO to Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, while creating a stronger partnership with Russia and Ukraine to build a Europe that is undivided, democratic, and at peace.


Remarks to the Democratic Business Council
August 7, 1997

So we are doing theright things, and we've had a good fall. We've also invited the first new members to join NATO. We've established alliance with Russia and Ukraine. We have worked very hard to get the country, for the very first time, to embrace national education standards. And I hope all of you will help us get every State in the country to do that. 
We had the Summit of Service that I mentioned, and I launched a very important initiative on race relations which will last for at least a year, as we examine for the first time in a noncrisis way not only what the unfinished business is in America between the white majority and African-Americans or Hispanic-Americans but an equally, perhaps even more important question over the long run, which is what are we going to be like as a nation in 30 years when, unless something happens, there will be no majority race in America, and we will become the world's first truly great multiracial, multiethnic democracy. And unlike—there are many ethnic groups, for example, in a nation like Russia, but most of them live in discreet parts of the country. In our country, we're going to have 150—actually, more than 150 different racial and ethnic groups largely sharing the future together



Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Dinner
August 7, 1997

I feel good about a lot of the things that have happened in foreign policy, our expansion of NATO, our working with Russia in that regard. I feel good about the Presidents' Summit of Service we had in Philadelphia. I'm very committed to this initiative on examining and improving race relations, which I think is absolutely critical to our future. All these things have been started this year.


Remarks at a National Conference of Democratic Mayors Dinner
August 12, 1997

And I hope that, frankly, it will be a model for future administrations of both parties, because it seems to me rather foolish to not make the most of the incredible potential that you now know the office of the Vice President has because of the way that Vice President Gore has filled it. He's headed our reinventing Government program. He's done a masterful job of working with the mayors and with Secretary Cuomo and Secretary Cisneros before him and working with the empowerment zone program and the enterprise communities. He's basically led our efforts in telecommunications policy, our efforts to put computers in our schools. And by the way, we've got some money for that in our budget, so we'll be able to help your cities hook all your classrooms and libraries up by the year 2000. He has headed a special commission with the Prime Minister of Russia and a special commission with Mr. Mbeki of South Africa and taking a leading role in every single foreign policy and defense decision of this administration



