MID 445001, China

Remarks at Mount Rushmore National Memorial in Keystone, South Dakota
August 15, 2002
You just need to know that when I talk to the Chinese, I'm talking about soybeans. I want South Dakota soybeans to be sold into China. When we talk to Vladimir Putin, we're talking about chickens. Every time I have a conversation with world leaders, when it comes to trade, I remind them that we expect there to be a level playing field for American agricultural products. I believe firmly듈 believe firmly that good trade policy will yield good jobs in America.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
September 4, 2002
At the same time, I will work with our friends in the world. I've invited Prime Minister Blair to come to Camp David on Saturday, and he'll듣e's coming. I've looked forward to talking with him about our mutual concerns about how to make the world more secure and safe. I will see Jean Chretien on Monday, as we등e'll talk about how to make our borders work better, but at the same time, I'll talk to him about this subject. I'll be on the phone to leaders of the듂hina and Russia and France, and then I'll be giving the speech at the United Nations

Remarks at a Dinner for Congressional Candidate Chris Chocola in South Bend
September 5, 2002
I started a debate in Washington yesterday that is a very important national debate. It's a debate that we must have. It's a debate about our future and about peace, and it's a debate about Saddam Hussein. I want Congress involved in this debate. Tomorrow morning I'm going to call the leaders of China and Russia and France to talk about how to make the world more peaceful and more secure. I'm going to meet with Prime Minister Blair Saturday night, Prime Minister Chretien on Monday, all aimed at building a consensus and talking about a true threat that faces our country.

Remarks at a Luncheon for Representative Anne M. Northup in Louisville
September 5, 2002
One of my jobs is to think ahead and to think들s to cause debate, and I started that yesterday, to encourage the American people to listen to and have a dialog about Iraq. And I meant it when I said that I'm going to consult with Congress. I want there to be an open discussion about the threats that face America. Tomorrow I'm calling leaders in Russia, China, and France to talk about the threats that face us all. I will see Tony Blair on Saturday. I will see Jean Chretien Monday. My point to you is, not only will I consult with Congress and talk to Congress듨y administration and I will do so듈 will also see many of the leaders of the world and remind them of the facts. The facts are, this is a man who gassed his own people, he's invaded two countries, a person who stiffed the international organization time and time again.

Remarks to the Community in Louisville, Kentucky
September 5, 2002
I look forward to a dialog. I'm a patient man. I've got tools등e've got tools at our disposal. And therefore, yesterday I began an important discussion about our future, about peace, about freedom; a discussion that I will continue to have with the United States Congress, Republican and Democrat alike; a discussion I will carry on with the American people; a discussion I will begin at the United Nations next week; a discussion I will have with the Prime Minister of Britain Saturday; a discussion I'll have with the Prime Minister of Canada on Monday; a discussion I'll be having with the President of Russia, Premier of China, President of France tomorrow.
