MID 292901, US v China, 6 aug to 5-Sep-65 to 23-Nov-67



6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 12, 1966

In recent months a number of nations have east out those who would subject them to the ambitions of mainland China. 
History is on the side of freedom and is on the side of societies shaped from the genius of each people. History does not favor a single system or belief--unless force is used to make it so. 
That is why it has been necessary for us to defend this basic principle of our policy, to defend it in Berlin, in Korea, in Cuba-and tonight in Vietnam.


86 - Remarks in New York City Upon Receiving the National Freedom Award
February 23, 1966

Fifth, some ask about the risks of a wider war, perhaps against the vast land armies of Red China. And again the answer is "no," never by any act of ours--and not if there is any reason left behind the wild words from Peking. 
We have threatened no one, and we will not. 
We seek the end of no regime, and we will not. 
Our purpose is solely to defend against aggression. To any armed attack, we will reply. We have measured the strength and the weakness of others, and we think we know our own. We observe in ourselves, and we applaud in others, a careful restraint in action. We can live with anger in word as long as it is matched by caution in deed



128 - Remarks at the Signing of the Supplemental Military Authorization Bill.
March 15, 1966

How sad it is that such great sums must be spent for the bombs and the planes and the gunpowders of war. How joyous it would be if these great resources could he put, instead, to the service of peace. We have said this and we have repeated it time and time again, and we will never tire of saying it, and I repeat it now: The people of Vietnam, North and South, have the same basic human needs. The people of Asia and the people of China have the same basic human needs


141 - The President's News Conference
March 22, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. I think the Secretary of State covered the administration's position very thoroughly Sunday. If he didn't, the Press Secretary did. If not, I would call to your attention that we have watched with interest and complete understanding the testimony of various committees, those of Mr. Zablocki in the House, and Mr. Fulbright in the Senate,4 and the testimony about that part of the world. We think that it is very good to have the opinion of these professors and experts, and Ambassadors and other people. 
As far as I am aware, it is not the position of this country that creates the problems with China. It is China's own position. We are very anxious to try to have more contact with her and more exchanges with her, but as has been explained by all of these people, she hangs up the phone. Until there is some change on China's part, I doubt that these academic discussions will do much more than satisfy people's yearning for information


158 - The President's News Conference
March 31, 1966

Secretary Rusk took them on a trip around the world. He discussed the African Continent, the Western Hemisphere, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, India, Pakistan, the Tashkent Agreement, the Soviet Union, the Chinese situation, Vietnam



228 - Remarks at a Democratic Party Dinner in Chicago.
May 17, 1966

I sent our ambassadors to more than 40 countries. I wrote letters to nearly 120 in the world asking for assistance, asking for peace. My plea was well received in all the nations of the world except the two most concerned, Red China and North Vietnam



277 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. I read Senator Mansfield's speech with a great deal of interest and pleasure. I asked Secretary Rusk to give the majority leader's observations very careful consideration. He is doing that. 
I have not discussed in detail with Senator Mansfield any information he may have about the willingness of the Chinese Foreign Minister to meet with Secretary Rusk. But I think we have made it very clear that we will be delighted to review the Senator's views, any information he has, and give careful consideration to them



311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966

A few years ago the nations of free Asia lay under the shadow of Communist China. They faced a common threat, but not in unity. They were still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations. They were ripe for aggression.
Now that picture is changing

They shifted over to heavy weapons, using imported ammunition, most of it coming from Communist China

There is nothing that we want in Communist China. There is nothing the American people want from Communist China.


325 - Remarks to the American Alumni Council: United States Asian Policy.
July 12, 1966

Communist China's policy of aggression by proxy is failing

A peaceful mainland China is central to a peaceful Asia. 
A hostile China must be discouraged from aggression. 
A misguided China must be encouraged toward understanding of the outside world and toward policies of peaceful cooperation. 
For lasting peace can never come to Asia as long as the 700 million people of mainland China are isolated by their rulers from the outside world. 
We have learned in our relations with other such states that the weakness of neighbors is a temptation, and only firmness that is backed by power can really deter power that is backed by ambition. But we have also learned that the greatest force for opening closed minds and closed societies is the free flow of ideas and people and goods. 
For many years, now, the United States has attempted in vain to persuade the Chinese Communists to agree to an exchange of newsmen as one of the first steps to increased understanding between our people. 
More recently, we have taken steps to permit American scholars, experts in medicine and public health, and other specialists to travel to Communist China. And only today we, here in the Government, cleared a passport for a leading American businessman to exchange knowledge with Chinese mainland leaders in Red China. 
All of these initiatives, except the action today, have been rejected by Communist China



338 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. It is the same as it was in my speech. I spelled it out in somewhat substantial detail in that speech. I feel that we should do everything we can to increase our exchanges, to understand other people better, to have our scientists and our businessmen, our authors and our newspaper people exchange visits and exchange viewpoints. 
I would hope that as a result of tearing down these harriers that some day all people in this world would be willing to be guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that all peoples would want to cease aggression and would try to live in peace and understanding with their neighbors. 
So far as I am concerned, every day I am looking for new ways to understand the viewpoint of others. And I hope that at a not too distant date mainland China will be willing to open some of the barriers to these exchanges and be willing to perhaps come nearer to abiding by the principles laid down in the United Nations Charter



346 - Remarks in Indianapolis at a Ceremony Marking the 150th Anniversary of the State of Indiana.
July 23, 1966

Inside Communist China there is a struggle for power. There is a great debate going on today on the future of policy. It is obvious that their past policies have failed. In time, we hope and we believe that the mainland Chinese will come to terms with their neighbors and the rest of the world



397 - Remarks at a Navy League Luncheon, Manchester, New Hampshire.
August 20, 1966

And for more than 39 days, while we pleaded with 40 countries--every place we went we received favorable response except from the two countries that could do something about it, North Vietnam and Red China


398 - Remarks at Battery Park, Burlington, Vermont
August 20, 1966

Sure, we don't have all those things that we want. We must do better. We must have objectives, we must have goals. We must move forward. But when you look at our problems and those of the Soviet Union, when you look at our problems and those of Red China, when you look at our problems and those of Castro's Cuba, you have so much to be thankful for



417 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 27, 1966

The Denver speech was an elaboration, perhaps, and a freshening up of what I said in the speech I made as a young Congressman on the floor of the House on our relations with other nations when we had the Truman doctrine pending. At that time I said that we should have a domestic policy and people abroad should judge our foreign policy by what we are doing at home

I think it is very important for the Communist Chinese, the Russians, the North Vietnamese to know this--as I tried to say in my press conference the other day
THE PRESIDENT. I have always felt it essential for all of them to understand it. I feel the same way about the Chinese on the mainland and the North Vietnamese. The purpose of the Baltimore speech 16 was so they could really understand what was in our heart. 
That is a difficulty we have with the Communists when we try to get them to let newspapermen go into China. They refuse it and refuse to let us send them some of our exchange people. This even happens to the Soviet Union. They stop them in Tokyo
I think it is going to take a lot of explaining for the Russians to see what is truly in our hearts, because it is so different from what they really believe. The same thing is true of China and North Vietnam. 
We would like to see people go into Red China. We would like for some of them to come in here. I have gone into that in other areas. I tried to touch on that when I talked about our interests in the Pacific in my television speech that Mr. Fulbright 17 pointed out might have involved new commitments. It doesn't. We have no new commitments. We made that clear to him


420 - Remarks to the Delegates to the American Legion National Convention.
August 30, 1966

Make no mistake about the character of this war. Our adversaries have done us at least one great service: They have described this war for what it is--in unmistakable terms. It is meant to be the opening salvo in a series of bombardments--or, as they are called in Peking, "wars of liberation." 
And if it succeeds in South Vietnam, then, as Marshal Lin Piao says, "The people in other parts of the world will see . . . that what the Vietnamese people can do, they can do, too." 
It may be that this is only rhetoric. It may be that this is only the grandiose propaganda of one whose country has not fared so wall in other continents this year. But as the Economist of London wrote only last week, "Until and unless there is solid evidence that China does not intend to do what Lin Piao says it wants to do, or cannot do it, the only safe assumption for the Americans or anybody else to make is that the Chinese mean every word they say. That," says the Economist, "is where any sober Asia policy starts from." 
The bravery of young American patriots on the battlefield, the steadfast determination of our people at home, will--in time-bring an end to this trial of aggression.



437 - Remarks at the Fairfield County Fairgrounds, Lancaster, Ohio.
September 5, 1966

In Asia, we have a similar hope, though tonight it is clouded by war and it is clouded by bitterness. But still we look to the day when those on the mainland of China are ready to meet us half way, are ready to devote their enormous talents and their energy to improving the life of their people, when they are ready to take their place peacefully as one of the major powers of Asia and the world



445 - The President's News Conference
September 8, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. We always are glad when other nations feel that there is no reason for them to engage in a confrontation with us. 
Each day we pursue with every means available to us suggestions and ideas and make proposals that are calculated to bring about better understanding and better relations with other nations. 
We will continue to do that. We do do that. So the answer to both of your questions is "yes." 
First, we are glad to see people feel that there is no reason why they should have a confrontation with us. Second, yes, we do explore every possibility that we are aware of and encourage everything that we think has any potential



533 - Remarks at the East-West Center in Honolulu.
October 18, 1966

We think sooner or later this new perception will spread as well to the closed societies of Communist Asia. Sooner or later the pragmatic and compassionate spirit of the Chinese people will prevail over outmoded dogmatism. 
We in America look to that day with hope and with confidence. 
For our part, we shall do what we can to hasten its coming. We shall keep alive the hope for a freer flow of ideas and people between mainland China and the United States, as I have said so recently on so many other occasions. For only through such exchange can isolation be ended and suspicion give way to trust. 
We do not believe in eternal enmity. All hatred among nations must ultimately end in reconciliation. We hopefully look to the day when the policies of mainland China will offer and will permit such a reconciliation



554 - Remarks Upon Arrival at Bangkok, Thailand.
October 28, 1966

I believe that the Conference of seven nations succeeded at Manila; but that is a judgment that will best be made by history. For the Pacific waters also touch Hanoi and mainland China. One day, I believe, they will join the Pacific neighborhood--in peace, and without the suspicions and hostilities that make cooperation difficult today. 
One day they will be good neighbors. We look forward to that day. For our passion is peace. We seek no eternal hostility. We seek no dominance. We arecommitted to the proposition that no nation shall dominate another nation in the Pacific



555 - The President's Toast at a State Dinner in His Honor in Chakri Throne Hall, Bangkok, Thailand.
October 28, 1966

The search for freedom led my own ancestors from their homeland in Europe, as it led yours from their ancestral home in China. The Thais were more successful. Since your first migration, nearly one thousand years ago, the people of Thailand have never been a colony of any foreign power. But we Americans are still less than 200 years away from colonial status



557 - Remarks at Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Before Signing the International Education Act.
October 29, 1966

Twenty-five hundred years ago in Athens, in Palestine, in China, and in the western part of India, men probed deeply into the nature of their being--trying to make sense out of their lives



560 - Remarks at the State Dinner in Parliament House, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
October 30, 1966

While I have been in Asia the Communist Chinese have exploded another nuclear weapon, which they state was attached to a missile. 
We can only regard the pursuit of national nuclear power by too large a part of the underdeveloped world as a tragedy. For bread is the need of millions who face starvation every day, and bombs are too often purchased at the price of bread. 
The pursuit of a national nuclear capability not only makes international arms control, including a nuclear test ban and a nonproliferation treaty, vastly more difficult; it also invites danger to China itself. For the leaders of China must realize that any nuclear capability they can develop can-and will--be deterred. We have already declared that nations which do not seek national nuclear weapons can be sure that they will have our strong support, if they need it, against any threat of nuclear blackmail. 
We hope very much that mainland China, like other developing nations, will concentrate its resources on economic development. In this way a truly modern China can emerge on the Mainland. For a peaceful China has nothing to fear from any of us. A peaceful China can expect our friendship and our cooperation. A reckless China can expect vigilance and strength. 
All of Asia will gain when the day comes to pass that China is at peace with her neighbors and free from the fears and the suspicions that tonight keep her isolated from the rest of the world



607 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
November 11, 1966

I found that in almost every case the leaders of the governments felt that the spectacle of the confusion that exists in Peking now and in Red China was reducing China's influence and it gave a better opportunity for a quieter attitude. 
As the President has said, and I found it confirmed everywhere, every country in the world, with the exception of Red China and Hanoi, wants to see peace. That consensus, the pressure of world opinion, I think, gives us a right to have some encouragement



610 - The President's News Conference
November 13, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. None other than what you have seen



654 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
December 31, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. It is our hope that all the nations of the world could reach some agreement in the field of nonproliferation. In recent weeks I have felt encouraged about the discussions that have taken place. I wish that it were possible to say to the American people and to the world that all the nations of the world could reach agreement in this field. 
As yet we have not been able to bring that about. And even when we bring it about, we do not know that all nations will agree. We are working to that end. We think it is a desirable objective. We will hope for the best



3 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 10, 1967

We shall continue to hope for a reconciliation between the people of Mainland China and the world community--including working together in all the tasks of arms control, security, and progress on which the fate of the Chinese people, like their fellow men elsewhere, depends. 
We would be the first to welcome a China which decided to respect her neighbors' rights. We would be the first to applaud her were she to apply her great energies and intelligence to improving the welfare of her people. And we have no intention of trying to deny her legitimate needs for security and friendly relations with her neighboring countries





34 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I think that there is little I can add to what the general public knows about the events in China. I think that we all know that they are having very serious problems. 
And I would not think that would add anything to the strength of our adversaries in that area. I think that we can see from some of the problems that we have ourselves from time to time that unity is very important in connection with our operations. 
And I do not see that the differences in China are going to contribute anything to the strength of the North Vietnamese. 
On the other hand, I do not want to hold out any hopes to you that I do not have myself. And I cannot say at this moment that the events in China are going to contribute immediately to the end of the war in Vietnam




225 - The President's News Conference
May 18, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I don't think it would serve any purpose to speculate about that. 
THE PRESIDENT. Same answer
THE PRESIDENT. I know of nothing that would indicate any optimistic changes. Ambassador Gronouski reported to me at some length this morning--as I assume he did to you--about his work there. He is diligent and dedicated. We believe that he is doing a good job. 
I don't think that we have the answer to the kind of relations with a good many other nations that we would like to have. We constantly work on them, try to improve them. There is our bridgebuilding, East-West trade. 
We were and are hopeful that someday it might lead to an improvement of relations and that someday it might make it possible for all of us to live with understanding and peace in the same world together. It hasn't made that progress yet--either there or here. We still have a long way to go. 
The consular treaty was a close vote, as you know. There are some differences now about the ABM. There is still a good bit of feeling about the nonproliferation agreement. We have to bridge some gaps several places yet, but we are working on them


THE PRESIDENT. I believe that our objectives are the same and our determination is just as strong as it has ever been. 
I don't see any great fluctuation in activity, opinion, or judgment. I have said that it is a very difficult thing that we are going through. It tests the patience and the understanding of each of us. 
I hope that all of my countrymen and our friends in the world will recognize and realize what we are doing and why we are doing it. 
We believe it is in the best interests of freedom everywhere. We have given our views on negotiation, on peace, and on related matters many, many times. 
I know of nothing to be gained by repeating them. But I think that you can see there is hardly anyone who feds that there ought to be unilateral withdrawal. I think that fewer feel that way today than yesterday-or the period behind us.



312 - The President's News Conference
July 18, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I don't know of any developments that have taken place that I could announce at this time

THE PRESIDENT. We have made it clear in a good many statements since I became President that we would like to see all of the nations of the world join in the community of nations and try to learn to work together and to live together in peace and harmony. 
We repeat that on every appropriate occasion. I have discussed our views in that regard with a number of leaders from other countries. I know of no change from the policy that I have had ever since I have been President



358 - The President's News Conference
August 18, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. First I would like to make it clear that these air strikes are not intended as any threat to Communist China. They do not, in fact, pose any threat to that country. We believe that Peking knows that the United States does not seek to widen the war in Vietnam. 
The evidence has been quite clear, we think, that the strikes were made against the major military staging areas and lines of communication where the enemy has been concentrating his supplies and troops. The transportation routes and bridges over which those troops have been moved against our men have been hit. 
We think that these targets are directly related to the enemy's capacity to move material into South Vietnam to kill American boys. 
The targets to us were clearly identifiable. They were carefully selected. They were all within North Vietnam. 
The strikes were made by the most highly trained pilots that we had. They employed every human and every technical precaution to insure that the ordnance fell on target. It did. 
While everyone is entitled to his opinion-a good many of them express it--the tougher the going gets, the more difficult it will be for some to stay with us and go all the way, and last it out. 
Nevertheless, we believe that if we are going to be there, it is essential to do everything we can to protect the men we have there. 
We are going to try to provide the maximum deterrent at the minimum loss



409 - Address on Vietnam Before the National Legislative Conference, San Antonio, Texas.
September 29, 1967

Vietnam is the focus of attention now ....It may happen to Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is misery, disease, ignorance....For you to renounce your position of leadership in Asia is to allow the Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia."



492 - The President's Remarks to Reporters Following His Meeting With Prime Minister Sato
November 15, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. It will last until you get the communiqu?. The answer is "yes


