MID 428001, China v. US
Jan 31 to March 2, 2001 – July 3, 2001



Remarks to State Department Employees
February 15, 2001

America will set its own priorities, so that they're not set by our adversaries or the crisis of the moment. We must work closely with our democratic friends and allies in Europe and Asia. We must engage Russia and China with patience and principle and consistency. We must build our trade relations across Africa and help nations that are adding to the freedom and stability of their continent


The President's News Conference
February 22, 2001
The President. We're concerned about the Chinese presence in Iraq, and we are— my administration is sending the appropriate response to the Chinese. Yes, it's troubling that they'd be involved in helping Iraq develop a system that will endanger our pilots. 
The President. We think that may be the case. Let me just tell you this. It's risen to the level where we're going to send a message to the Chinese

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom at Camp David
February 23, 2001

President Bush. If I can answer that first, because we had a little bit of news today that the Chinese responded to our inquiry. And you're going to have to ask Condi Rice what specifically they said, but if I could paraphrase, it was: If this is the case, we'll remedy the situation. But we did get a response. As I told you yesterday, that we filed a complaint, and they responded this morning




Remarks at the Christening Ceremony for the U.S.S. Ronald Reagan in Newport News, Virginia
March 4, 2001

One of the ways we show the world we take our values seriously is to live by them ourselves. Our Nation cherishes freedom, but we do not own it. While it is the birthright of every American, it is also the equal promise of the religious believer in southern Sudan or an Iraqi farmer in the Tigress Valley or of a child born in China today. We help fulfill that promise not by lecturing the world but by leading it


Remarks at the Dedication of the Pope John Paul II Cultural Center
March 22, 2001

Pope John Paul II brings that message of liberation to every corner of the world. When he arrived in Cuba in 1998, he was greeted by signs that read, "Fidel is the Revolution!" But as the Pope's biographer put it, "In the next 4 days, Cuba belonged to another revolutionary." We are confident that the revolution of hope the Pope began in that nation will bear fruit in our time. And we're responsible to stand for human dignity and religious freedom wherever they are denied, from Cuba to China to southern Sudan


Remarks Prior to Discussions With Vice Premier Qian Qichen of China and an Exchange With Reporters
March 22, 2001

China has got vast potential, and we've got common interests in China. And I look forward to discussing our interests. 
Our relationship, of course, will be a complex relationship. There will be areas where we can find agreement, such as trade. There will be some areas where we have some disagreements. I look forward to committing to this distinguished leader that any disagreements we will have, we will conduct ourselves with mutual respect. I will be firm, and I suspect he will be firm, in our opinions, but we will do so in a respectful way. It is in our Nation's best interests that we have good relations with China. 
And before I introduce our distinguished guest, I do want to say how much I'm looking forward to going to China. I'll be going next fall; the Government has invited me to go to Beijing. I accept the invitation. We'll work out the arrangements, but I'm really looking forward to it. As a young man, I visited my mother and dad in China in 1975, and I look forward to my return. I can't wait to see the change, the contrast between when I was a younger fellow and now, kind of an older guy. [Laughter] 
But I'm looking forward to coming to your country, sir. Welcome. 
President Bush. I will echo the sentiments that the Secretary of State said today about the fact that a U.S. citizen was detained without any notification. I look forward to discussing this with our honorable guest and will do so. 
We have obligations under the Taiwan Relations Act, and we'll honor those obligations. No decision has been made yet as to the sale of weapons to Taiwan. 
President Bush. I look forward to seeing the modernization that has taken place. I look forward to seeing the beautiful countryside that I remember so well. 
But most of all, I look forward to getting to know the leaders of China. I think the best thing I can do is to—the best thing our delegation will do is to be able to sit down, face to face, and have an honest dialog. People will find that I'm a straightforward person, that I represent my country's interests in a very straightforward way, but I will do so with respect. 
President Bush. This meeting will give me a chance to confirm the fact that I will honor our obligations under the Taiwan relations law. I look forward to explaining that as clearly as I can to our distinguished guest. If he cares to bring up the subject and wishes to make a case, I will be glad to listen, but no decision has been made yet. And I'll do what I think is in the best interests of our relationships and in the best interests of conforming to obligations we have. 
President Bush. Well, the Chinese, I'm convinced, like my father because he married well. [Laughter] My mother is very well respected in China, as is my dad, because they spent time there, and they befriended a lot of folks who are now leaders. 
It will come as no surprise to our Chinese guest that I'm a believer in religious freedom, and I will make a—state it politely and as clearly as I can that ours is a nation that respects religious freedom; ours is a nation that honors religious freedom; and that our relationship will move forward, but it will certainly be a lot easier to move forward in a constructive way when our people with whom we conduct our affairs honor religious freedom within their borders. 


Remarks on the United States Navy Surveillance Aircraft Incident in the South China Sea
April 2, 2001

Late Saturday night in Washington, Sunday morning in China, a United States naval maritime patrol aircraft on a routine surveillance mission in international airspace over the South China Sea collided with one of two Chinese fighters that were shadowing our plane. Both our aircraft and a Chinese aircraft were damaged in the collision. Our aircraft made an emergency landing at an airfield on China's Hainan Island. 
We have been in contact with the Chinese Government about this incident since Saturday night. From our own information, we know that the United States naval plane landed safely. Our Embassy in Beijing has been told by the Chinese Government that all 24 crewmembers are safe. 
Our priorities are the prompt and safe return of the crew and the return of the aircraft without further damaging or tampering. The first step should be immediate access by our Embassy personnel to our crewmembers. I am troubled by the lack of a timely Chinese response to our request for this access. Our Embassy officials are on the ground and prepared to visit the crew and aircraft as soon as the Chinese Government allows them to do so, and I callon the Chinese Government to grant this access promptly. 
Failure of the Chinese Government to react promptly to our request is inconsistent with standard diplomatic practice and with the expressed desire of both our countries for better relations. 
Finally, we have offered to provide search and rescue assistance to help the Chinese Government locate its missing aircraft and pilot. Our military stands ready to help.

Remarks Following Discussions With President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and an Exchange With Reporters
April 2, 2001

President Bush. My reaction is, is that the Chinese must promptly allow us to have contact with the 24 air men and women that are there and return our plane to us without any further tampering. I sent a very clear message, and I expect them to heed the message. 
President Bush. My message stands for itself. 
President Bush. Well, I made a very clear statement about how I viewed the incident. It is clear that we had a plane flying in international—over international waters that was damaged. It landed, and we expect there to be contact, as soon as possible, with our crewmembers. And we expect that plane to be returned to us.


Remarks Calling on China To Return the United States Military Crew and Surveillance Aircraft
April 3, 2001

Good afternoon. I want to report to the American people, and especially to the families involved, that I've just talked with Brigadier General Sealock, who earlier today met with our 24 men and women in China. 
The general tells me they are in good health; they suffered no injuries; and they have not been mistreated. I know this is a relief to their loved ones and to all Americans. 
Our crewmembers expressed their faith in America, and we have faith in them. They send their love to their families. They said they're looking forward to coming home, and we are looking forward to bringing them home. 
This is an unusual situation in which an American military aircraft had to make an emergency landing on Chinese soil. Our approach has been to keep this accident from becoming an international incident. We have allowed the Chinese Government time to do theright thing. But now itistime for our service men and women to return home, and itistime for the Chinese Government to return our plane. 
This accident has the potential of undermining our hopes for a fruitful and productive relationship between our two countries. To keep that from happening, our service men and women need to come home


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the American Society of Newspaper Editors
April 5, 2001

The President. I appreciate you bringing up the subject. I want to make this clear. First, I regret that a Chinese pilot is missing, and I regret one of their airplanes is lost. And our prayers go out to the pilot, his family. Our prayers are also with our own service men and women. And they need to come home. 
The message to the Chinese is: We should not let this incident destabilize relations. Our relationship with China is very important, but they need to realize that itistime [orginally it’s time; replaced for Yoshikoder] for our people to be home. We're working all diplomatic channels to affect our priority. There's discussions going on. And we'll continue to do so. My mission is to bring the people home. 
And as to whether or not we'll have good relations, my intention is to make sure we do have good relations. But the Chinese have got to act, and I hope they do so quickly. 
The President. I have no further comments on the subject. That won't count as a question. [Laughter] 

The President. I believe that China ought to be a trading partner of ours. I think it's in our economic interests to open up the Chinese markets to U.S. products—to U.S. agricultural products. I not only believe it's in our economic interest, I believe it's in our interest to promote U.S. values. And I believe the marketplace promotes the values. When people get a taste of freedom in the marketplace, they tend to demand other freedoms in their societies. And so, I'm an advocate of China's entering into the WTO, and I'm hopeful that the current situation ends quickly and our people come home. 
China is a strategic partner—I mean, strategic competitor. But that doesn't mean we can't find areas in which we can partner, and the economy's a place where we can partner. 
And we've got some differences with China, long-term differences. Spreading of weapons of mass destruction is an issue that we need to work with the Chinese on, as well as other nations in that part of the world. Human rights is an issue. But I believe trade will encourage more freedoms, particularly when it comes to individual liberties. But the marketplace is— the marketplace unleashes the opportunity for people to make choices. And so I will continue to push for trade with China, and—— 


Remarks on Presenting the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Awards in Crystal City, Virginia
April 6, 2001

Before I begin, I would like to update you on the situation in China. Earlier this morning I talked with General Sealock, who once again visited with our crew for about an hour today and reports that they are doing just fine. They are housed in officers' quarters, and they are being treated well. We're proud of these young men and women who are upholding the high standards of our Armed Forces. We know this is a difficult time for their families, and I thank them for their patriotism and their patience. We're working hard to bring them home through intensive discussions with the Chinese Government, and we think we're making progress


Remarks Prior to a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
April 9, 2001

The President. First, I just talked to General Sealock, who had a good visit with all 24 crewmembers. His report is that their spirits are very high, that they're doing well, and that's good news. Secondly, all of us around this table understand diplomacy takes time. But there is a point—the longer it goes—there's a point at which our relations with China could become damaged. 
The President. Every day that goes by increases the potential that our relations with China could be damaged. And our hope is that this matter gets resolved quickly. 
The President. We're working behind the scenes. We've got every diplomatic channel open. We're in discussions with the Chinese. It is now time for our troops to come home so that our relationship does not become damaged


Remarks Following Discussions With King Abdullah II of Jordan and an Exchange With Reporters
April 10, 2001

President Bush. We are working hard to resolve the situation. The first piece of news I have to report is, I talked to the General, Sealock, again. He met with our folks in Hainan Island. He reported that spirits are high, that the troops are patient. He informed us that there is an exchange of e-mails between the—our troops and their families, which is—I found to be an important piece of news, that the families will be able to talk to each other. 
Diplomacy sometimes takes a little longer than people would like. I urge the Chinese to bring resolution to this issue. Itistime [orginally it’s time; replaced for Yoshikoder] for our people to come home. 
President Bush. We are—there's a lot of people that are anxious for this situation to end. I appreciate the good will of a lot of Americans that are concerned about our folks in Hainan Island. This administration is doing everything we can to end the stalemate in an efficient way. We're making theright decisions to bring the solution to an end. 
President Bush. No. I am making it clear to the Chinese that it's in their nation's interests to end this situation as quickly as possible. As all members of my administration have been saying, that the longer this goes, the more likely it is that it could—could—jeopardize relations, and we certainly don't want that to happen

Remarks on Plans for Release of United States Navy Aircraft Crewmembers in China
April 11, 2001

Good morning. I'm pleased to be able to tell the American people that plans are underway to bring home our 24 American service men and women from Hainan Island. 
This morning the Chinese Government assured our American Ambassador that the crew would leave promptly. We're working on arrangements to pick them up and to bring them home. 
This has been a difficult situation for both our countries. I know the American people join me in expressing sorrow for the loss of life of a Chinese pilot. Our prayers are with his wife and his child. 
I appreciate the hard work of our Ambassador to China, Joseph Prueher, and his entire Embassy team, who worked tirelessly to solve this situation. The American people, their families, and I are proud of our crew, and we look forward to welcoming them home



Remarks at Concord Middle School in Concord, North Carolina
April 11, 2001

Before I talk about a subject dear to my heart, which is education, and before I recognize all the distinguished guests, I do want to say that right after my visit here, I am going to meet with the family of Petty Officer Third Class Steven Blocher. As you know, Steven is one of our 24 service men and women in China.


Remarks to the Community in Greenville, North Carolina
April 11, 2001

I'm pleased to report that a commercial charter airplane is close to landing in Hainan Island. 
The President. The plane is expected to leave that island in a couple of hours, bound for Guam and then for Hawaii. Earlier today I had the privilege and honor to meet fellow North Carolinians Bob and Sandra Blocher, the parents of one of the 24 crewmembers, Petty Officer Third Class Steven Blocher. They are, of course, as you can imagine, thrilled to know that the service men and women are returning home. 
These have been difficult days for all the families. And these days are a reminder of the sacrifices all our men and women in uniform and their family make every single day for freedom. And so we're proud and thankful for the service of folks. We're proud and thankful for their parents, and we can't wait for them to get home.


Remarks on the Return of United States Navy Aircraft Crewmembers From China
April 12, 2001

We're looking forward to talking with the flightcrew about exactly how the accident happened. From all the evidence we have seen, the United States aircraft was operating in international airspace in full accordance with all laws, procedures, and regulations and did nothing to cause the accident. 
The United States and China have agreed that representatives of our Governments will meet on April 18th to discuss the accident. I will ask our United States representative to ask the tough questions about China's recent practice of challenging United States aircraft operating legally in international airspace. 
Reconnaissance flights are a part of a comprehensive national security strategy that helps maintain peace and stability in our world. During the last 11 days, the United States and China have confronted strong emotions, deeply held and often conflicting convictions, and profoundly different points of view. China's decision to prevent the return of our crew for 11 days is inconsistent with the kind of relationship we have both said we wish to have. 
As we move forward, the United States and China will no doubt again face difficult issues and fundamental disagreements. We disagree on important basic issues such as human rights and religious freedom. At times, we have different views about the path to a more stable and secure Asian-Pacific region. 
We have different values, yet common interests in the world. We agree on the importance of trade, and we want to increase prosperity for our citizens. We want the citizens of both our countries to enjoy the benefits of peace in the world, so we need to work together on global security problems, such as preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction. 
I will always stand squarely for American interests and American values. And those will no doubt sometimes cause disagreements with China. Yet, I will approach our differences in a spirit of respect. 
The kind of incident we have just been through does not advance a constructive relationship between our two countries. Both the United States and China must make a determined choice to have a productive relationship that will contribute to a more secure, more prosperous, and more peaceful world.


The President's Radio Address
April 14, 2001
Our thoughts are also with the men and women of our military, deployed around the world and away from their families. They have our sincere gratitude. And on this holiday, we offer the thanks of our Nation to the 24 service men and women who are no longer in China and are now home


Remarks at the White House Correspondents' Association Dinner
April 28, 2001

Some people wondered—and I'm sure there might have been a few out here— how I would handle the recent incident in China. Truth is, I have long been a serious student of the Orient. [Laughter] My mom and dad, of course, were in China when Dad was the U.S. liaison there. People have asked me, "Is it difficult trying to follow in the footsteps of a man who was President, Vice President, U.N. Ambassador, a man who held so many other important jobs? Is it hard being such a man's son?" Not really.


The President's Radio Address
April 28, 2001
Internationally, we are building a more peaceful and open world. Our relationship with China is maturing. There will be areas where we can agree, like trade, and areas where we won't agree—Taiwan, human rights, religious liberty. And where we disagree, I will speak frankly


Remarks at the National Defense University
May 1, 2001

We'll also need to reach out to other interested states, including China and Russia. Russia and the United States should work together to develop a new foundation for world peace and security in the 21st century. We should leave behind the constraints of an ABM Treaty that perpetuates a relationship based on distrust and mutual vulnerability. This Treaty ignores the fundamental breakthroughs in technology during the last 30 years. It prohibits us from exploring all options for defending against the threats that face us, our allies, and other countries


Remarks on the California Energy Shortage and an Exchange With Reporters
May 3, 2001

The President. In terms of what they call the ticktock, you need to talk to the folks at the Defense Department. But what the Secretary was rightly doing was saying that we're going to review all opportunities to interface with the Chinese. And if it enhances our relationship, it might make sense. If it's a useless exercise and it doesn't make the relationship any better, then we won't do that. But each opportunity will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. That makes sense. We've only been in office for 104 days. We've got to review all policy that we inherited. 
But what the Chinese must understand is that we'll be firm in our philosophy, consistent in our beliefs, and we want to work to have a relationship that is a positive relationship for both countries.


Remarks to the American Jewish Committee
May 3, 2001

I'm pleased to say that many countries in the region show considerable and improving respect for religious liberty—Morocco, Tunisia, Jordan, and Bahrain among them. But there are other regimes, not only in north Africa and the Middle East, whose disrespect for freedom of worship is seriously disturbing. Iraq murders dissident religious figures. Iran systematically maltreats Jews, Christians, and adherents of the Baha'i faith. The Burmese junta tortures adherents of Islam, Buddhism, and Christianity. Cuba monitors and harasses independent priests and ministers. Afghanistan's Taliban government has horrified the world with its disdain for fundamental human freedoms, epitomized by its destruction of ancient Buddhist works of art. And the newly independent republics of central Asia impose troubling limits on religious expression and missionary work. We view with special concern the intensifying attacks on religious freedom in China. 
In many respects, China has made great strides toward freedom in recent decades. China's economy has opened. Chinese people enjoy greater personal mobility, more secure property rights, and enlarged access to information. These are not small achievements, and they do promise even greater change. 
But the Chinese Government continues to display an unreasonable and unworthy suspicion of freedom of conscience. The Chinese Government restricts independent religious expression. We hear alarming reports of the detention of worshipers and religious leaders. Churches, mosques have been vandalized or demolished. Traditional religious practices in Tibet have long been the target of especially harsh and unjust persecution. And most recently, adherents of the Falun Gong spiritual movement have been singled out for arrest and abuse. 
China aspires to national strength and greatness. But these acts of persecution are acts of fear and, therefore, of weakness. This persecution is unworthy of all that China has been, a civilization with a history of tolerance. And this persecution is unworthy of all that China should become, an open society that respects the spiritual dignity of its people


Remarks to the Council of the Americas Conference
May 7, 2001

Look at our friends, Mexico, and the political reforms there. Look at Taiwan. Look at South Korea. And some day soon, I hope that an American President will end that list by adding, look at China. I believe in open trade with China, because I believe that freedom can triumph in China


Remarks at the Electronic Industries Alliance Dinner
May 8, 2001

I've been questioned about my policy toward China. China is a great emerging nation. I strongly support trade with China. I not only do so because I know it's good for our entrepreneurs, our high-tech folks, our farmers and ranchers, but for those of us—and I know we all share the same thing in America—who adhere to the ideals of freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom to—freedom of press


The President's News Conference
May 11, 2001
The President. We've sent clear signals to the Chinese that we expect our citizens that have been detained, and/or citizens who have been detained with U.S. relatives, that we expect them to be treated fairly. And we'd like for them to have whatever due process the Chinese can offer. We have expressed our concerns. Sometimes they listen; sometimes they don't. 
Our relations with China are relations that are going to be based upon a consistent message with the Chinese: One, we expect there to be trade, and I hope there is trade; but two, that we expect people to be treated fairly inside that country. And hopefully they'll respond.



Remarks Greeting Crewmembers of the United States Navy Surveillance Aircraft Downed in China and an Exchange With Reporters
May 18, 2001

The President. We're working to get the plane home. We're making progress about getting the plane home. But today we get to celebrate the fact that the crew is home. And that's the most important thing.



Commencement Address at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland
May 25, 2001

Last month when our EP-3 crew came home from Hainan Island in China, millions of Americans had the opportunity to hear their story on television. From officers and crew, including Lieutenant John Comerford, Annapolis class of 1997, America learned firsthand about the skill and courage it took to land their wounded plane. We also saw a glimpse of the fortitude that allowed the crew to maintain its unity and spirit


Remarks to the Los Angeles World Affairs Council in Los Angeles, California
May 29, 2001

We're grateful that the world's most skilled workers want to come to the United States. Our technology advantage rests on the contributions of immigrants from places like India or China, Russia, Iran, and hundreds of others of countries. But while we're importing the world's best, too many Americans are locked out of the economy of a future by schools that don't teach and won't change. Our prosperity agenda will equip every American child with the skills he or she needs to do valuable work and earn a good wage

To demonstrate American leadership on all these issues, I'm asking the United States Congress to approve U.S. trade promotion authority this year. And because trade creates prosperity and prosperity promotes democracy, I will notify Congress on June 1st that I intend to extend normal trade relation status with China for another year. 
Open trade is a force for freedom in China, a force for stability in Asia, and a force for prosperity in the United States. And this is not just my personal view. The institutions and individuals in China who are the least friendly to freedom are often the least friendly to trade. The institutions and individuals most sympathetic to freedom are often the most friendly to trade. They know what I know: Free trade supports and sustains freedom in all its forms. 
Free trade has expanded the portion of China's economy that is independent of the State. Free trade has swelled the ranks of independent businessmen. Free trade has introduced new technologies that offer Chinese people access to uncensored information and democratic ideas. 
When we open trade, we open minds. We trade with China because trade is good policy for our economy, because trade is good policy for democracy, and because trade is good policy for our national security


Remarks on Global Climate Change
June 11, 2001

This is a challenge that requires a 100 percent effort, ours and the rest of the world's. The world's second largest emitter of greenhouse gases is China, yet China was entirely exempted from the requirements of the Kyoto Protocol. India and Germany are among the top emitters, yet India was also exempt from Kyoto. These and other developing countries that are experiencing rapid growth face challenges in reducing their emissions without harming their economies. We want to work cooperatively with these countries in their efforts to reduce greenhouse emissions and maintain economic growth.


Remarks to Agricultural Leaders
June 18, 2001
And Zoellick also came back with some pretty good news from China. I don't know if you have all been following his negotiations there, but we're beginning to get our bilateral agreement with China made. And he can give you the details. But the agreement with China will end export subsidies and, we anticipate, boost U.S. agricultural exports to China by $2 billion a year. He sat down and rolled up his sleeves and kept in mind what I asked him to do, and he delivered a good agreement. 
But there's more to do, and he told the Chinese that our bilateral agreements—that compliance, an early test of their willing to trade, will depend upon bilateral agreements on citrus and wheat, meat. And so we're just making—we're beginning to open up that big market. And I think the Ambassador deserves a lot of credit. But don't give him any until he describes exactly what he did to you. [Laughter]

























