MID 433601, China v. US
Jan 22 to Feb 21, 2001 – March 23, 2001



Remarks to State Department Employees
February 15, 2001

America will set its own priorities, so that they're not set by our adversaries or the crisis of the moment. We must work closely with our democratic friends and allies in Europe and Asia. We must engage Russia and China with patience and principle and consistency. We must build our trade relations across Africa and help nations that are adding to the freedom and stability of their continent.


Interview With Steve Holland and Debbie Charles of Reuters
January 11, 2001

But even if that happens, with the proliferation of technology around the world, we can't possibly know who might have missiles in the future. So I think we're almost morally obligated to continue to try to develop this kind of system. However, if we deploy the system in a way that leads to more proliferation and more insecurity, that's very problematic. And it's one of the things that I had to consider, that if we just set it up, even if we were worried about North Korea and the Middle East, if the Chinese interpreted it as a move to try to contain them, even though there's no way we could— even if they have just 50 missiles, that's more than—or two dozen, whatever they've got—two dozen I guess, more or less—they might decide that now they need 300


The President's News Conference
February 22, 2001
The President. We're concerned about the Chinese presence in Iraq, and we are— my administration is sending the appropriate response to the Chinese. Yes, it's troubling that they'd be involved in helping Iraq develop a system that will endanger our pilots. 
The President. We think that may be the case. Let me just tell you this. It's risen to the level where we're going to send a message to the Chinese


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom at Camp David
February 23, 2001

President Bush. If I can answer that first, because we had a little bit of news today that the Chinese responded to our inquiry. And you're going to have to ask Condi Rice what specifically they said, but if I could paraphrase, it was: If this is the case, we'll remedy the situation. But we did get a response. As I told you yesterday, that we filed a complaint, and they responded this morning


Remarks at the Christening Ceremony for the U.S.S. Ronald Reagan in Newport News, Virginia
March 4, 2001

One of the ways we show the world we take our values seriously is to live by them ourselves. Our Nation cherishes freedom, but we do not own it. While it is the birthright of every American, it is also the equal promise of the religious believer in southern Sudan or an Iraqi farmer in the Tigress Valley or of a child born in China today. We help fulfill that promise not by lecturing the world but by leading it


Remarks at the Dedication of the Pope John Paul II Cultural Center
March 22, 2001

Pope John Paul II brings that message of liberation to every corner of the world. When he arrived in Cuba in 1998, he was greeted by signs that read, "Fidel is the Revolution!" But as the Pope's biographer put it, "In the next 4 days, Cuba belonged to another revolutionary." We are confident that the revolution of hope the Pope began in that nation will bear fruit in our time. And we're responsible to stand for human dignity and religious freedom wherever they are denied, from Cuba to China to southern Sudan


Remarks Prior to Discussions With Vice Premier Qian Qichen of China and an Exchange With Reporters
March 22, 2001

China has got vast potential, and we've got common interests in China. And I look forward to discussing our interests. 
Our relationship, of course, will be a complex relationship. There will be areas where we can find agreement, such as trade. There will be some areas where we have some disagreements. I look forward to committing to this distinguished leader that any disagreements we will have, we will conduct ourselves with mutual respect. I will be firm, and I suspect he will be firm, in our opinions, but we will do so in a respectful way. It is in our Nation's best interests that we have good relations with China. 
And before I introduce our distinguished guest, I do want to say how much I'm looking forward to going to China. I'll be going next fall; the Government has invited me to go to Beijing. I accept the invitation. We'll work out the arrangements, but I'm really looking forward to it. As a young man, I visited my mother and dad in China in 1975, and I look forward to my return. I can't wait to see the change, the contrast between when I was a younger fellow and now, kind of an older guy. [Laughter] 
But I'm looking forward to coming to your country, sir. Welcome. 
President Bush. I will echo the sentiments that the Secretary of State said today about the fact that a U.S. citizen was detained without any notification. I look forward to discussing this with our honorable guest and will do so. 
We have obligations under the Taiwan Relations Act, and we'll honor those obligations. No decision has been made yet as to the sale of weapons to Taiwan. 
President Bush. I look forward to seeing the modernization that has taken place. I look forward to seeing the beautiful countryside that I remember so well. 
But most of all, I look forward to getting to know the leaders of China. I think the best thing I can do is to—the best thing our delegation will do is to be able to sit down, face to face, and have an honest dialog. People will find that I'm a straightforward person, that I represent my country's interests in a very straightforward way, but I will do so with respect. 
President Bush. This meeting will give me a chance to confirm the fact that I will honor our obligations under the Taiwan relations law. I look forward to explaining that as clearly as I can to our distinguished guest. If he cares to bring up the subject and wishes to make a case, I will be glad to listen, but no decision has been made yet. And I'll do what I think is in the best interests of our relationships and in the best interests of conforming to obligations we have. 
President Bush. Well, the Chinese, I'm convinced, like my father because he married well. [Laughter] My mother is very well respected in China, as is my dad, because they spent time there, and they befriended a lot of folks who are now leaders. 
It will come as no surprise to our Chinese guest that I'm a believer in religious freedom, and I will make a—state it politely and as clearly as I can that ours is a nation that respects religious freedom; ours is a nation that honors religious freedom; and that our relationship will move forward, but it will certainly be a lot easier to move forward in a constructive way when our people with whom we conduct our affairs honor religious freedom within their borders. 








