MID 306201, US v Syria, 5 jul to 4-Aug-83 to 1-Apr-84



The President's News Conference
July 26, 1983
The President. No, I am very hopeful that if this partial withdrawal takes place that it will be recognized and admitted to be, by the Israelis, as one phase of their agreement to withdraw. If they withdraw in a phased withdrawal, it certainly will give us a better case for breaking the roadblock that has been established by Syria and persuading them to keep their original promise that when others withdrew they would withdraw. 
But if this is a phased withdrawal, I think there is fear if there's simply a withdrawal to another line and then a digging in and fortifying along that line, that this would be what it looks like Syria is doing, and that is simply trying to partition Lebanon, reduce Lebanon, and grab off some territory for themselves. But with the agreement that's been signed between Lebanon and Israel, I don't think Israel has that in mind.



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
September 21, 1983

The mission that the multinational force was created for has not changed. At the time the first request came in, you'll remember that the Israelis were in, the Syrians were in, the PLO was in, and the fighting was going on, and hundreds and hundreds of innocent people were being killed in the shelling and bombing that was taking place

Everything was proceeding on schedule, our negotiations in which we helped Lebanon and Israel to come to an agreement. You will remember at the time Syria had promised that when everyone else got out, they, too, would get out. Then they changed their minds. Whatever reason, well, we can take our own guess at that. They've made it pretty apparent that they feel that they have a proprietorship over much of Lebanon. They—and I think under the influence of the Soviet forces that are there in their own country—are behind much of what is presently going on. 
But the efforts toward a cease-fire still go on. And the opposition to that is coming from Syrians and now from PLO who have reinfiltrated after they were once taken out of the country and have moved into the fighting. And if this fails, the peace plan for the whole Middle East that we had proposed and offered our help in bringing about, based on Camp David and the United Nations resolutions that they had passed, I think also goes. All of us must ask ourselves, if we're not aware, that the reason we were trying to promote a peace plan is that the Middle East is vital to the Western World, the United States, and to our allies.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session During a Teleconference With Members of the Republican Northeast Regional Leadership Conference 
September 23, 1983

Our role is what it was when we first sent them in as a part of the multinational force. As you recall, Lebanon, beginning back several years ago, had kind of come apart. The Syrians had moved in on one side. And then with the northern border of Israel violated by PLO attacks that were shelling and sending rockets across the border and killing innocent civilians, they had moved into Lebanon. 
We, as you know, a year ago submitted a plan for peace in all of the Middle East and we set out with an effort to persuade the more moderate Arab States to recognize Israel's right to exist and then to come together and, in effect, create more Egypts, more nations that would sign peace treaties with Israel. 
But first we had to restore the order in Lebanon or see it restored. You will recall that Israel, in its own defense, had moved all the way up to Beirut; the shelling was going on; Syrians were coming in from the other side; and there were several factions that over these several years in Lebanon had created militias, armies of their own, and were fighting each other. Well, the idea was that the multinational force would move in to be a stabilizing force as we persuaded the other nations to get out—the PLO, the Syrians, the Israelis to get out of Lebanon. And then as a new government of Lebanon would attempt to regain control over its own borders and its own land, the multinational force would be there, as I say, as a kind of stabilizing force to help maintain order. 
This is still the mission. Now, what happened was that Israel announced its intention to withdraw. The PLO, as you know, was ushered out of Lebanon. Then the Syrians-who had said that when everyone would withdraw, they'd be a part of it, they would withdraw—they reneged. And the Syrians stayed in. And there's no question but that they're influenced by the Soviet Union, which has put people in there, and weapons systems, and is urging them to support, and they are supporting, some of those internal Lebanese factions. 
But we're there with the idea of maintaining order while the Lebanese Army-which we in this same interim period have helped train, and it is an excellent force-tries to restore the order, the internal order. Now they've been reinfiltrated by PLO that have come back in. The Syrians, as I say, are encouraging these groups and even supporting them with supplies and, we believe, sometimes manpower. 
The one thing that has changed is the violence has struck at all of the multinational force. There have been casualties among all the nations that are involved there, including four marines killed and a number wounded. And we've given orders, and our allies in that force have given orders to their people, to defend themselves. And so we've been doing that. Now, as to a time certain for getting out, I don't know that anyone knows that. But at the same time, we do have very heavy diplomatic efforts going forward, with our representatives there trying to bring about a cease-fire in the internal conflict and then turn our attention to the Syrians and the others getting out of Lebanon


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Cease-fire in Lebanon 
September 25, 1983

The President. Well, we commended President Gemayel for what he has done, but also we have to say the Syrians are evidently cooperating in this, and the Saudi Arabians. We must recognize that Saudi Arabia had a very definite hand in bringing about this first step, this cease-fire.


Remarks at a Reception for the Heads of Delegation to the 38th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York, New York 
September 25, 1983

Let me say that President Gemayel of Lebanon has shown true statesmanship during this period. The Secretary-General and I spoke with him by telephone earlier today to congratulate him on this cease-fire and to wish him well. The assistance of Saudi Arabia, the cooperation of Syria have also been indispensable during this process


Interview With Members of the Editorial Board of the New York Post in New York City 
September 26, 1983

The President. I don't know of any pressure of that kind. But I do know that just as we had two ambassadors there who were back and forth working virtually around the clock, trying to bring the various parties together, they were most helpful in doing the same thing and, I think, have to be recognized for that. So, I wouldn't know what persuasion was used or anything else, but finally we have the cease-fire.


Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Lebanon 
October 8, 1983

Lebanon, the site of refugee camps for a great many Palestinians, had been torn by strife for several years. There were factions, each with its own militia, fighting each other. Terrorists in Lebanon violated Israel's northern border, killing innocent civilians. Syrian forces occupied the eastern part of Lebanon. Israeli military finally invaded from the south to force the PLO attackers away from the border. There could be no implementation of our peace initiative until this situation was resolved. 
Over the course of several months, Lebanon and Israel negotiated a friendly agreement for security of the border between the two. We stand by this as a good agreement. But Syria, which had earlier agreed to withdraw if Israel did, changed its mind, and today has some 5,000 Soviet advisers and technicians and a massive amount of new Soviet equipment in its country, including a new generation of surface-to-surface missiles—the SS-21. We have to wonder aloud about Syrian protestations of their peaceful intentions.


The President's News Conference
October 19, 1983
Now an agreement has been reached between the Lebanese Government and Israel. We are doing everything we can to persuade Syria to quit being a roadblock in this process. But that was the first phase, Lebanon; then, and our intention remains the same, working with the more moderate Arab States to bring about the kind of peace with Israel that Anwar Sadat helped bring about

The President. Well, the answer to the first part of the question is that I know the Syrians are dragging their feet, but there have been other indications as to the reason for that. Syria, for many years, has talked about a thing called Greater Syria, in which they've believed that much of Jordan and much of Lebanon truly should belong to them. And I think that they have that kind of an interest in this, and aided and abetted by about 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians and some pretty sophisticated Soviet weaponry, I think that they are contributing to the disorder and the trouble. 
Now, if they're doing it with the idea of wearing me down, they're going to be disappointed. 
The President. Well, the marines will always defend themselves, and we will provide that defense. But we're going to—I know that many of the Arab nations have been joining us—we're going to continue the diplomatic process that was advanced so brilliantly by Phil Habib and by Ambassador McFarlane, which brought about the present situation and the desire of the government there to now broaden its base and bring in some of the dissident groups and all. We're going to continue with that process. 
But I don't think there's any way that we should stand by and just let Syria destroy what so many people want, which is peace and order there in that troubled country.



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters on the Situation in Lebanon 
October 24, 1983

So we recognized that what we had to resolve first was this issue: to get Syria, which had crossed from the other border, to get Syria, get Israel, get the PLO organization out of Lebanon and then to have a stabilizing force while a government could be established in Lebanon and their military could then acquire the capability necessary to reinstitute their control over their own borders. And this was why the multinational force went in—to provide that stability so that when the Lebanese forces moved out, as the other forces, the Israelis and the Syrians left, there could be a maintenance of order behind them. 
Now that mission remains, and it did have measures of great success. Some 5,000 of the organized PLO militias, as you'll remember, were shipped out of Lebanon. Some of those, we fear, have been infiltrated back in, mainly by way of Syria now. But that was accomplished. A government was established. We have helped very definitely with the training of the Lebanese Army, and they proved the quality of that training recently in the fighting in the hills and around Suq al Gharb. And we think that they have—they don't have the size yet to where they could take over in, let's say, the policing of that area and of the airport and still have enough manpower to go out and restore order as they're supposed to


I wish it could be without hazard, but the alternative is to look at this region which, as I say, is vital. Our allies in Western Europe, the Japanese—it would be a disaster if a force took over the Middle East. And a force is ready to do that, as witness what has taken place in Yemen, in Ethiopia, and now the forces of some several thousand that are theirs in Syria


Address to the Nation on Events in Lebanon and Grenada 
October 27, 1983

Syria, which makes no secret of its claim that Lebanon should be a part of a Greater Syria, was occupying a large part of Lebanon. Today, Syria has become a home for 7,000 Soviet advisers and technicians who man a massive amount of Soviet weaponry, including SS-21 ground-to-ground missiles capable of reaching vital areas of Israel. 
Before the necessary negotiations could begin, it was essential to get all foreign forces out of Lebanon and to end the fighting there. So, why are we there? Well, the answer is straightforward: to help bring peace to Lebanon and stability to the vital Middle East. To that end, the multinational force was created to help stabilize the situation in Lebanon until a government could be established and a Lebanese army mobilized to restore Lebanese sovereignty over its own soil as the foreign forces withdrew. Israel agreed to withdraw as did Syria, but Syria then reneged on its promise. Over 10,000 Palestinians who had been bringing ruin down on Beirut, however, did leave the country. 
A few weeks ago, the Israeli army pulled back to the Awali River in southern Lebanon. Despite fierce resistance by Syrian-backed forces, the Lebanese army was able to hold the line and maintain the defensive perimeter around Beirut


Remarks Announcing the Appointment of Donald Rumsfeld as the President's Personal Representative in the Middle East 
November 3, 1983

The President. No, I don't think that that should happen. 
The President. In that climate?



Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel Following Their Meetings 
November 29, 1983

A main focus of our meetings was the agony of Lebanon and the threats there to our common interests. We examined, together, Soviet activities in the Middle East and found a common concern with the Soviet presence and arms buildup in Syria. We reaffirmed our commonly held goals of a sovereign, independent Lebanon free of all foreign forces, and of security for Israel's northern border

We reaffirmed our determination to ensure the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon. The only basis for a settlement of the Lebanese problem is the full implementation of the May 17, 1983, agreement in all its parts. We have discussed with the President and the Secretaries the necessarysteps that could facilitate the carrying out of this agreement. Syria constitutes today a major threat to the peace in our area by occupying more than 60 percent of Lebanon and by its massive concentration of Soviet arms and personnel on Syrian territory


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the United States Airstrike in Lebanon 
December 4, 1983

For some time now, we have been flying regular and routine reconnaissance flights with unarmed planes in Lebanon as a part of the protection and defense of our forces there. We notified the Syrians of this some time ago, assuring them that the planes were unarmed, that this was purely for reconnaissance. There have been some instances of firing at those planes now and then from unknown sources. But early yesterday, two such reconnaissance missions were fired upon by literally hundreds of antiaircraft and a combination of surface-to-air missiles, which were coordinated from several sites by the Syrians. Early today, we responded to this unprovoked attack by striking back at those sites from whence had come the attack. 
We don't seek hostilities there. Our mission remains what it was: to help stabilize the situation in Beirut until all the foreign forces can be withdrawn and until the Government of Lebanon can take over the authority of its own territory. But we are going to defend our forces there. And this was the reason—or the purpose of the mission earlier today. 
The President. Yes. We've had this report that two of the pilots, or the crew of one plane—two planes were shot down of ours. The pilot, as you know, was rescued that landed outside of that area. Two inside. I don't have any further word except that we are attempting to negotiate their release.
There have been rumors or reports of some kind of the loss of one, but we have no substantiation of that. 
The President. I am going to find all that out, because we're just—our Embassy has been notified, and they're making contact. 
The President. Do we fear a military confrontation with Syria? Well, I think that's the wrong word. I think the question is wrong. We don't want such a thing; we don't desire it. But—and I think this'11 answer your question over here at the same time about if it happens again, will we fire back—we haven't fired at anyone unless it has been to return fire against attacks made upon our forces. 
Yes, if our forces are attacked, we will respond. We're going to defend our personnel that is there. 
The President. Well, that's—your guess is as good as mine. We don't know. The conflicting stories that are coming out of there, the attempt now to portray him as being active and on the scene—we really have no assurance one way or the other. 
The President. I wouldn't know. All I know is that this was coordinated by the Syrians. 
The President. Well, I hope that it doesn't make it any more difficult. I hope that the reaction would be the other way. But we're going to continue with the mission that we embarked upon some time ago, and that is to bring peace to that area.
So, now, that's about all. Thank you.


Interview With Garry Clifford and Patricia Ryan of People Magazine 
December 6, 1983

Lebanon was stalling that, if you remember. You had Israel and Syria both in. Israel had crossed the border because PLO terrorist units were attacking villages across their northern border from Lebanon. The Lebanon Government, as of several years ago, was virtually powerless in the face of what can only be termed warlords in their own country, of several factions, each with its own militia, fighting each other and fighting the Government. And you couldn't proceed with the peace mission until we resolved this problem. 
So, we sent a force in with the idea that-well, first of all, they'd gotten some 10,000 PLO out; now the idea was that both Israel and Syria get out, then a stabilizing force there while the Lebanese Government reformed and created a military force in which it could then take over jurisdiction of its own territory. 
Well, the first blow was that the Syrians, after saying, yes, they would get out, said, no, they wouldn't. The Israelis were prepared to get out. Both sides wanted—the idea was they would go out simultaneously. And so our force there is there for that purpose. And there wouldn't have been a shot fired by a marine or by our Navy or Air Force if they had not been shot at. And when that happened, I said wherever we send them, they're going to have theright to defend themselves and fire back. 
The President. It isn't a case of whether we will escalate. That is up to the Syrians and to some of those rebel groups that are fighting the Lebanese military. But we have only fired back when we have been attacked. And I am hopeful that after this last exchange that the Syrians will decide that they don't want to go on on that path. 
The President. Well, we're taking the next step right now. Don Rumsfeld1 is on his way back there, and we still are going to try for a political solution. We're going to try to negotiate with the Syrians and make them understand.
The President. Well, that becomes a kind of a hypothetical question in which I almost have to wait and see what the circumstances are. Actually, the Lebanese military-which we have helped to train and have equipped and which is a very good military force—is supposed to be resolving the situation for themselves as we try to maintain a little stability in Beirut while they can go forward and do this. 
The President. I don't see any reason why not. We've made great progress with the other Arab States, the more moderate states. I think that they are very ready for a negotiated settlement, continuing on with the Camp David accords and the U.N. resolutions. Syria is the big kid and the bad kid on the block, and the other Arab States have been trying, themselves, to persuade Syria to join in this effort and to withdraw. And now a new element has been introduced by Syria. They hadn't mentioned this before when earlier they said, oh, yes, they would get out, too. They now are not pretending that there is any assault on them or that they're in any danger and that's why they are staying there; they are now claiming that Lebanon properly is a part of a greater Syria. This is outright armed aggression now on their part, hoping to expand their territory at the expense of Lebanon and—they've even indicated—at the expense of Jordan
The President. Yes, because you have to look at the impact on what we were just talking about, with Lebanon. There they are with thousands of military advisers and technicians and so forth in Syria, have provided Syria with weapons that are not purely defense weapons—ground-to-ground missiles that can cover virtually every target from Syria in Israel. And they are the ones that seek, whether it's out of paranoia on their part—and, believe me, everyone's an enemy, and so they have to be aggressive-or whether it is the Marxist-Leninist theory, more than a theory—commitment-that was handed them, and that was that they must support uprisings wherever they take place in the world to bring about a one-world Communist state



Radio Address to the Nation on the Situation in Lebanon 
December 10, 1983

In the midst of all this, Syria was asked to intervene and stop the civil war. In the process, it occupied a large part of Lebanon. However, Syria did nothing to control terrorism against Israel's northern border. Israel decided to neutralize the PLO and, in June 1982, mounted a full-scale invasion across the border. This resulted in another major round of fighting between Syria, the PLO, and Israel. Shelling and bombing pounded Beirut. Thousands more died. 
We negotiated a cease-fire and then joined the multinational force at the request of the Lebanese Government to make possible the peaceful separation of the forces. This is the second time in 25 years that we have come to support the Lebanese Government in restoring peace. 
In 1958 President Eisenhower used a bipartisan congressional resolution to send 8,000 American soldiers and marines to Lebanon. When order was restored, our military came home. But in 1958 there were no occupying foreign armies, and there was no Soviet presence in Syria. Today, there are more than 7,000 Soviet military advisers and technicians.
We have acted with great restraint despite repeated provocations and murderous attacks. Our reconnaissance flights have only one purpose, and the Syrians know it: to give the greatest possible protection to our troops. We will continue to do whateverisneeded to ensure the safety of our forces and our reconnaissance flights. 
The peace process is slow and painful, but there is progress which would not have been possible without the multinational force. Last May with our help the Governments of Lebanon and Israel negotiated an agreement providing for the withdrawal of Israeli forces. In September when the Israelis pulled back their forces from the Shuf Mountains near Beirut, Lebanese attempts to extend their authority into this area were met by violent opposition from forces supported by Syria. We will redouble our diplomatic efforts to promote reconciliation and achieve withdrawal of all foreign forces


Interview With Bruce Drake of the New York Daily News 
December 12, 1983

The President. Meaning the forces. First of all, there are forces in Lebanon that are fighting not just with the new government of Lebanon but are fighting with each other. They have been for years. That's what caused the breakdown of Lebanon several years ago. But they're aided and abetted by others who have other ideas. The Syrians, for example, have made it plain that they believe that Lebanon is really intended to be a part of a greater Syria. 
The proposal was that, when finally the PLO—which was one of the battling factions-was ousted and left, that a multinational force would go in—the idea that the two nations, Syria and Israel, would leave. Both had agreed to—said that when the other left, they would leave Lebanon. 
The multinational force was to be a sort of "keeping order force" while the Lebanese Government reinstated itself, developed an armed force that could then take over in these war-torn areas as those two nations left. Remember that originally, there was no quarrel on the part of Lebanon of Syria invading, because it was invading against the PLO. So, Lebanon actually invited Syria to come in and help because of this kind of trouble. 
Now, the multinational force went in. I think there were a great many accomplishments. The fighting stopped. There was some withdrawal, and then Syria reneged on its agreement and has refused to leave. There is an agreement now between Lebanon and Israel, which Israel has agreed that it will leave. But it can't leave as long as it's threatened by the Syrian forces there
The President. We're not about to be drawn in. Let me call to your attention there's going to be no firing by the marines unless they are fired upon and they defend themselves. That's far different than going in as an aggressive force that is now going to advance and conquer territory. There's no intention on the part of the multinational force to do that

The President. Well, the Syrians immediately jumped onto the bandwagon of propaganda. But they haven't reported anything about the success of that mission. We knocked out a number of very important installations, including blowing up an ammunition dump. 

Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 14, 1983

The President. No. We have taken a position-and it is our policy that if this continues-we're not there to shoot first or to enter into combat. But I'm never going to send our men anyplace where they wouldn't be allowed to defend themselves. And it's been our policy that if they are attacked, they will defend. 
Now, we've seen these instances of being attacked. And we have retaliated as nearly as we can against those who have actually done the attacking. And we want no conflict with Syria. Certainly, we're not there to enter into a war. And we continue to try and communicate and negotiate with them to let them know that, if they'll stop shooting at us there won't be any problems between us.

Interview With Marvin Stone and Joseph Fromm of U.S. News & World Report 
December 15, 1983

Our whole idea all along has been to bring peace to the Middle East area generally and to act as a kind of go-between to bring these warring nations together. But Lebanon stood in the way. You will remember that in the summer of 1982 Beirut was being shelled in every direction, and in 1976 the authorities there had asked the Syrians to come in and help keep order, because the Government of Lebanon was virtually nonexistent and powerless to do anything about it. 
The multinational force moved in and created conditions that led to the partial withdrawal of the Israelis. Now there has been a change in Syria's position. Even after a request from the Lebanese Government to withdraw, the Syrians have refused, and they are still there. 
We believe that the purpose of the multinational force would be accomplished with the withdrawal of the other foreign powers and the establishment of a stable Lebanese Government, supported by a rebuilt Lebanese Army. We have done a fine job of training and equipping the Lebanese Army. It needs to be some bigger than it is. But it is a good and a well-trained force. And it has performed well. 
The idea was that as the foreign forces left and as the Lebanese forces moved out toward their borders to reinstitute control and stop the internecine fight, the multinational force would maintain order—for example, in areas like Beirut—because the Lebanese military couldn't do both. This is still the goal. 
The President. I think that, with all that's happening, we're overlooking the progress that's been made. At recent discussions in Geneva, all of those involved—even those who are presently hostile—agreed to recognize the Gemayel government as the legitimate Government of Lebanon. 
Another sign of progress is the fact, as I mentioned, that the Lebanese Army has been brought up to a capability it did not have before. 
But now further progress hinges particularly on Syria, which is the stopping block in its refusal to withdraw—even though it had once agreed to leave and said that if Israel left, it would leave.
I don't say that the multinational force has to stay until all those foreign forces are out. I think that even if they gave an assurance that they're going to go and start the process maybe we could then leave.

The President's News Conference
December 20, 1983
In the meantime, during all of this, the Lebanese asked the Syrians—asked them to come in and help preserve order, because in Lebanon we had, and have, groups—various, sometimes religious groups, but other groups that kind of, like warlords with their own militias. And they're fighting each other and, at times, fighting against the forces of the Lebanese Government. 
We were then asked to come in with the multinational force. And we went in, once the government had been formed there and once the PLO, when they were rejected, as they were—granted they came back later by way of Syria, but the goal and the idea was for the two foreign forces that were then left in there after the PLO left, for them to get out. But the Lebanese Government needed time to build its strength to where it could then go in with these internecine groups that were fighting there—go in and establish order over its own territory. 
Israel, having completed its mission, announced its willingness and intention to get out. Syria did, too. And then for some reason Syria reneged on that promise and has refused to get out, even though they have now been officially asked to get out by the government that asked them to come in. 
During the occupation by both Syria and the Israelis, they managed to keep some hold on those fighting groups in there, some order. The mission of the multinational force is what it was then. We have helped train the Lebanese Army, and it is a capable force. We have armed it. And when the other forces—the foreign forces get out and the Lebanese military advances to try and establish order in their land, the multinational force is supposed to, behind them, try to achieve some stability and maintain order, because Lebanon doesn't have the forces to do both. Well, this is the mission. 
And, as I say, progress has been made. The warring forces meeting in Geneva have acknowledged that the Gemayel government is the legitimate government of Lebanon. There is an agreement that has been reached and signed between Lebanon and Israel in which Israel has agreed in writing that they will withdraw. Indeed, I think they're anxious to. Now, the stumbling block still seems to be Syria. 
The President. You can avoid war. But I will say this, and I'll reiterate it: I will not okay a mission or ask or order our Armed Forces to go someplace where there is danger and tell them that they have not theright to defend themselves. So, when the sniping began and there was no retaliation, I made it plain by way of the channels in the Pentagon, as far as I was concerned, when an American military man is shot at, he can shoot back. And I think that there's been some indication that rather than stepped-up activity that there has been some pause for thought on those that were deciding that the multinational forces were fair game. 
I don't say that they won't try these terrorist activities again; I'm sure they will. But are we, and where would we be in the world—are we to let the terrorists win? Are we to say that, well, if terrorists are going to be active, we'll give in to them; we'll back away?
Sam [Sam Donaldson, ABC News]?
The President. Well, we have believed for a long time that the settlement there must be—in this whole area—must be political. I should have said this earlier, in my answer before about the history of this Lebanese situation. But we've had Ambassadors there from Phil Habib to Ambassador McFarlane, and now, Don Rumsfeld, because we're determined that there is a possibility. And it is the only way. You cannot—this can't be settled by force. And it is going to be settled that way. 
And Ambassador Rumsfeld has been in Damascus. He has met with the Syrians. Certainly, that is very high on the agenda. The Syrians claim that he's a prisoner of war. Well, I don't know how you have a prisoner of war when there is no declared war between nations. I don't think that makes you eligible for the Geneva accords. 
But, yes, we want that young man back. And, as I say, we're not missing anything, any possibility in trying to bring to terms these various factions so that we can achieve the goal of restoring order, a broader based government in Lebanon acceptable to more of the people, those that are presently hostile to this government, and the foreign forces back to their own borders. 
The President. I doubt that very much. I really do. In the sense of holding it up for trading something or other, no, I don't believe so. But I'm sorry that he is there. And I'm glad he is alive. But we're going to make every effort to get him back as quickly as possible.


Interview With Reporters on Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues 
December 23, 1983

The President. Well, this is what we need to find out. I can't believe that that radical group that, under the influence of the Syrians, created all this tragedy around Tripoli and the innocent people that were killed because of the violence of that battle—I can't believe that the millions of Palestinians are going to choose that leadership


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on the Pentagon Report on the Security of United States Marines in Lebanon 
December 27, 1983

There is reason to believe that the presence of the multinational force has made some progress. We have, now, an agreement between Lebanon and Israel which has Israel's agreement to withdraw. I don't believe that it's impossible to have a similar kind of agreement with Syria, which would recognize some of Syria's interests. And we know that at Geneva there was a kind of tacit recognition that the present government of Lebanon was the government of Lebanon. 


Exchange With Reporters on the Release by Syria of Navy Lieutenant Robert O. Goodman, Jr. 
January 3, 1984

All of us here are delighted, of course, and very happy that this has taken place. I have been in touch with and been talking with Reverend Jackson and our Ambassador there and with Lieutenant Goodman, who is, of course, pleased that he is coming home. And we, as I say, are very pleased with this. And now Ambassador Rumsfeld will be leaving this evening for Lebanon. And we will, with renewed spirit, continue our efforts and our negotiations to advance the cause of peace in Lebanon. 
The President. I'm not going to place any interpretation on it. I just am pleased that this action was taken. 

Remarks to Reporters Following a Meeting With Navy Lieutenant Robert O. Goodman, Jr. 
January 4, 1984

Lieutenant Goodman's release affords us a unique opportunity to—well, I took advantage of the opportunity to write to the President of Syria and callfor Syrian cooperation in securing peace in Lebanon. Last night Don Rumsfeld left to seek diplomatic solutions to the problems of the region. And today, on this happy occasion, let all of us unite in a renewed determination to achieve a lasting stability and the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Lebanon.

The President. Of course. 
The President. Well, we have opened—as the Reverend just said and as I said in my remarks—we have opened communications with him, and we hope it'll lead to that. 


Interview With Lou Cannon, David Hoffman, and Juan Williams of the Washington Post on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
January 16, 1984

No, the mission is still what it was, and that is that—remember that the main goal was the departure from Lebanon of foreign forces. We helped in the evacuation of the PLO, which was definitely one of the host fie foreign forces. Granted, many of them then came back in by way of Syria and other places, but that was out. 
We had had the word previously that both Israel and Syria would withdraw when the Lebanese Government was able to take over the policing of its own territory. The multinational force was to be there, you might say, behind the Lebanese Army, helping preserve order in that divided land while they went out and restored sovereignty. Well, Israel withdrew to much closer to their own borders. They're not fully withdrawn, but because Syria then balked and said no, they would not withdraw. And so, the mission still remains to enable the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Lebanese Government to resume control over their own sovereignty, their own territory


Interview With Robert L. Bartley and Albert R. Hunt of the Wall Street Journal on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 2, 1984

The multinational force was sent in at a time when Lebanon, after years of civil war, literally in which there virtually was no government—certainly they did not have authority over their own territory-the Israelis, because of the threats to their northern border and the actual assaults on their northern border, had finally advanced and gone all the way to the edge of Beirut. The PLO, with its terrorist bands, was widespread throughout the country. They were less refugees than they were an occupying force. The Syrians had moved in for their own purposes. Beirut was the battlefield. The casualties were mainly civilian. 
When we went in, the understanding was that both Israel and Syria had agreed that they would withdraw, both saying, when the other—we will withdraw together. The PLO had been taken out, removed from the country. Great progress was made. With the removal of the PLO, the Israelis signed an agreement and have already made phased withdrawals back toward their own border, Syria, for whatever reason of their own, reneged and has now said they won't withdraw. This is a stumbling block, and this is— 
The President. Well, what he was really admitting was the fact that they reneged because Syria is bent on territorial conquest. It wants Lebanon, or a large part thereof, to be Syria. They are an occupying force, in violation of what they had previously agreed to. 
But we look at the progress that had been made. We look now that there is a Government of Lebanon, and due to our own training of their military force—we have an army unit; everyone's so busy talking about the marines, they don't notice this—that the army has been in there training. We have been equipping them. They are, really, a first rate military force. They don't have the numbers yet. By April, however, there'll be double the number of brigades that they presently have. Of course, Syria's got some 57,000 armed—or military—on Lebanese soil. But as long as there is a chance for victory, for peace, I don't know of any of the multinational forces that are in there, the four nations in there, that are desirous of leaving. 
The President. Well, you have seen us retaliate in the event of when we've had artillery targets to fire back at. 
The President. No, but let me say this also with regard to that. Enough civilians have been the targets in this war. It is true that these terrorist groups and the Syrians and others and the Druze make use of civilians and launch their assaults by rocket or artillery or whatever from civilian enclaves and residential areas where to fire back you are a threat to civilian targets. 

Interview With the Knight-Ridder News Service on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
February 13, 1984

The President. King Hussein has been, I must say, most cooperative and has taken a great deal of courage to be that way in the situation as it is, with his border with Syria and all. And, yes, he is as determined as I am to find a way to pursue the problem of overall peace in the Middle East

Basically, that peace as we, I think, can all recognize, depends on peace between the Arab world and Israel. And, as you know, the Arab position for a long time had been that Israel did not have a right to exist as a nation and this was why the successive wars that have been fought there. But you couldn't get on with that while the strife was going on in Lebanon. It was literally war between Syria and Israel, to say nothing of the internecine war and the various factions within Lebanon itself. 
Now, one faction, the Syrians—we did get the PLO out. The Israelis withdrew from their positions—not all the way to their border, but certainly well back toward it. And I could understand their stopping short, because there still was no guarantee of safety of that border until everyone else left. The Syrians then reneged and refused to leave
Remember that the multinational force was not there in a combat role or to be allied with any of the factions engaged in this internecine warfare. As I say, they were there to permit the limited Lebanese forces, once they were ready, to move out into the areas that had once been occupied by Syria and Israel. And I think this mission still prevails. And if that mission can be better served, if there is a development in what is going on that it can be better served by them coming back and taking over some area, they would do that. Or if it's necessary for our own security, they would



Remarks at a Fundraiser for Republican Women Candidates on the Occasion of Susan B. Anthony's Birthday 
February 15, 1984

The presence of the multinational force, the MNF, must never be an excuse for the Syrians and their clients to avoid a negotiated solution and reconciliation. So to use our diplomatic and military resources to the best advantage, and after consultation with President Gemayel, we have decided to shift our forces to an offshore deployment. The recent outbreak of violence only reaffirms the importance of the actions that we're taking. If a moderate government were overthrown because it had the courage to turn in the direction of peace, imagine the consequences for the future. We will remain steady. We will pursue every avenue in the search for peace and stability in that troubled region


The President's News Conference
February 22, 1984
The President. Well, in the first place, no, I don't think, first of all, that you can say we have lost as yet. I know that things don't look bright, as bright as they have at some times in this last year and a half since they've been there, but I think itistime to review a little history here and what this mission was and is. 
A year and a half or so ago, we and some of our allies—the United Kingdom, France, and Italy—decided on this idea of a multinational force, all of us to contribute troops to go there on a stabilizing mission, not a combat mission at all. And I would like to recall what the situation was. There've been five wars in the last 36 years between Syria and Israel. Israel had crossed the Lebanese border because of terrorist attacks across her northern border, attacks on her civilians, and Israel had advanced all the way to Beirut. 
There were somewhere between ten and fifteen thousand PLO terrorists in Beirut, and a pitched war was being fought right there in the streets with thousands of casualties among civilians. Syria was also on Lebanese soil. Since 1975 Lebanon had been fighting a kind of civil war among its own people. There was very little in the way of a government in Lebanon by this time. The PLO—finally there was an indication that they would be willing to depart from Lebanon, but they were fearful of stopping fighting for fear that they would then, if they tried in an orderly way to get out, they would be massacred. This, again, was one of the reasons for our stabilizing force going in from the four countries. 
We went in with the idea that as they left, then the other two countries, Syria and Israel, could withdraw. Then, as a government was put in place in Lebanon—and we helped and intended from the beginning to help them restore their military capability not only with weapons but with training and all—that then, as Lebanon with a government was able to move out into the areas that had been occupied by Syria and Israel and where were the factions that had been part of the internecine warfare, the force put in by ourselves and the allies would have constituted behind their advance a stabilizing force there. 
Now, that was the mission. We wanted to prevent a war between Syria and Israel. It was a part and brought about by our proposal for an overall peace settlement in the Middle East, where we were going to try and bring, once and for all, the Arab nations and Israel together, to do what Egypt before them had done. 
Great progress was made in the first year. First of all, the PLO did leave. The Israelis did start a phased withdrawal and evidenced their intention to move back toward their own borders. Syria then reneged-having said that it would leave-and refused to leave, even though they were asked by the present Government of Lebanon. The first President was the brother of this present President. He was assassinated shortly after he took office, and a number of his Cabinet officials were murdered. He was elected, this President, as was his brother, under the laws of that country. 
Now, we still have an Ambassador at Large there that is commuting between Damascus and Beirut, Tel Aviv, trying to help wherever we can in bringing about a peaceful settlement. I have no hesitation in saying that I have no regret of the fact that we went in there with the idea of trying to bring peace to that troubled country. 
We are redeploying, because once the terrorist attacks started, there was no way that we could really contribute to the original mission by staying there as a target just hunkering down and waiting for further attacks. So, the forces have been moved, redeployed—ours as well as others, and ours are going to be on the vessels offshore. 
But as long as there's a chance for a peaceful solution, we're going to try and see if there's any contribution we can make to achieving that. And as long as that chance exists, I'm not going to give up and say, "Well, it's all over." And we're not bugging out; we're just going to a little more defensible position.


Remarks at the Young Leadership Conference of the United Jewish Appeal 
March 12, 1984

First, we must deter the Soviet threat. As the crossroad between three continents and the source of oil for much of the industrialized world, the Middle East is of enormous strategic importance. Were the Soviets to control the region—and they have expanded their influence there in a number of ways, notably, by stationing 7,000 troops and advisers in Syria—the entire world would be vulnerable to economic blackmail. Their brutal war against the Afghan people continues with increasing ferocity. We must notallow them to dominate the region. 
Third, we seek to go on promoting peace between Israel and her Arab neighbors. In response to the growth of Syrian power and the rise of the Iranian threat, we must help to protect moderate Arabs who seek peace from the radical pressures that have done such harm in Lebanon. 
Syria is trying to lead a radical effort to dominate the region through terrorism and intimidation aimed, in particular, at America's friends. One such friend we continue to urge to negotiate with Israel is King Hussein of Jordan. Today, Jordan is crucial to the peace process, and for that very reason, Jordan, like Israel, is confronted by Syria and faces military threats and terrorist attacks. 
Since the security of Jordan is crucial to the security of the entire region, it is in America's strategic interest, and I believe it is in Israel's strategic interest, for us to help meet Jordan's legitimate needs for defense against the growing power of Syria and Iran. Now such assistance to Jordan does not threaten Israel, but enhances the prospects for Mideast peace by reducing the dangers of the radical threat. 
This is an historic moment in the Middle East. Syria must decide whether to allow Lebanon to retain control over its own destiny or condemn it to occupation. Syria forced the Lebanese Government to renounce the May 17th agreement with Israel precisely because it was a good agreement. Now those who have chosen this course will have to find other ways to secure the withdrawal of Israeli forces. Arab governments and the Palestinian Arabs must decide whether to reach peace with Israel through direct negotiations. And if Arab negotiators step forward, Israel must decide if she will take the risks necessary to attain the real security that comes only with genuine peace. I have no doubt that given that choice, the Israelis will once again have the courage to choose peace.


Interview With Midwest Regional Reporters on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 20, 1984

The President. Well, let me just say, I'm not going to talk about details of it other than to say that the whole basis for peace in the Middle East, and the thing that we tried to help bring about and are going to continue to try and help bring about, is dependent on being fair and evenhanded in dealing with the moderate Arab States that I think also want peace—Israel, and we know our relationship with Israel and what it has always been and will continue to be. And we can't appear to be one-sided. Jordan—and King Hussein had the courage to participate and make himself available for the peace efforts, and he is in a position in which there was some risk entailed with the border that he has with Syria. And, therefore, I think that it is only fair. And if we don't make available the things that he needs for his own security, he's going to find them someplace else.


Interview With Steven R. Weisman and Francis X. Clines of the New York Times on Foreign and Domestic Issues 
March 28, 1984

Remember that when this all started, Israel, because of the violations of its own northern border by the Palestinians, the PLO, had gone all the way to Beirut. War was being fought in the city streets there with the PLO. Casualties among civilians were probably exceeding those of the military. The Syrians, they were also on Lebanese soil. And we went in to help bring about the removal of the PLO, who felt that any effort to surrender could result in a massacre, and they were—some ten to fifteen thousand were removed from the country. Syria had indicated that it, too, would leave, the Israelis would leave, and then Syria changed its mind. That was unanticipated. 
But even so, the purpose of the troops of Italy, the United Kingdom, France, and ourselves were there to more or less help maintain order while a government, a viable government of Lebanon was created and then to help train—which we did-their army to then go out and occupy the areas occupied by foreign forces—Syria and Israel—as they withdrew, because, also, in those areas were the militias, the unofficial armies that had been fighting each other and fighting the government, such as it was, in Lebanon. 
Now, for quite some time, progress was made. And I still have to say right now the progress, the meetings that have taken place in Switzerland would not have taken place had all of us not done what we did. It is true that when Syria balked and began supporting some of the rebel elements—but our whole idea was that for Libya—or for Lebanon to have a government, they were going to have to make peace with those militias and find some kind of a broad-based government. And they've set out and they've tried to do that. It didn't succeed. 
We did not succeed in what we thought could have gone forward. There has not been—they are still working at it there, the Lebanese Government. One thing, also: We did a good job of training their military and equipping it. What we couldn't anticipate then was at the instigation of Syria, on ethnic and religious bases, some of the elements of that trained army then refused to perform against the radical forces that the army had been trained to handle



