MID 296201, US v Cuba, 1 mar to 31-Mar-77 to 1-May-77



"Ask President Carter" - Remarks During a Telephone Call-in Program on the CBS Radio Network
March 5, 1977

THE PRESIDENT. Well, there are varying degrees of relationships with Cuba. As you know, we have had some discussions with them in the past; for instance, on the antihijacking agreement which expires this spring. And we now have no visitation rights by American citizens to go to Vietnam, to North Korea, to Cuba, and one or two other nations. 
We do have a procedure already in effect whereby a limited number of Americans can go into Cuba without using a passport because of a prior agreement with the Cuban Government. 
I would like to do what I can to ease tensions with Cuba. It's only 90 miles, as you know, from the Florida coast. And I don't know yet what we will do. Before any full normalization of relationships can take place, though, Cuba would have to make some fairly substantial changes in their attitude. I would like to insist, for instance, that they not interfere in the internal affairs of countries in this hemisphere, and that they decrease their military involvement in Africa, and that they reinforce a commitment to human rights by releasing political prisoners that have been in jail now in Cuba for 17 or 18 years, things of that kind. 
But I think before we can reach that point we'll have to have discussions with them. And I do intend to see discussions initiated with Cuba quite early on reestablishing the antihijacking agreement, arriving at a fishing agreement between us and Cuba, since our 200-mile limits do overlap between Florida and Cuba, and I would not be averse in the future to seeing our visitation rights permitted as well. 
THE PRESIDENT. It's a possibility, yes.
THE PRESIDENT. No. The preconditions that I describe would be prior to full normalization of relationships, the establishment of embassies in both our countries, the complete freedom of trade between the two countries. 
But you couldn't possibly arrive at a solution to some of those questions without discussions. So, we will begin discussions with Cuba if they approve the idea fairly shortly on the items that I have described--increased visitation of Americans to and from Cuba, the fishing rights question that has to be resolved for the protection of our own fishermen, and also the antihijacking agreement which has been in effect in the past, but is about to expire


The President's News Conference
March 9, 1977
Later on this year we'll go to Belgrade to assess the component parts of the Helsinki agreement. And I want to be sure that we don't violate those rights. So I've instructed the Secretary of State to remove any travel restrictions on American citizens who want to go to Vietnam, to North Korea, to Cuba, and to Cambodia. And these restrictions will be lifted as of the 18th day of March.



The President's News Conference
March 24, 1977
We have no hard evidence or any evidence, as far as that goes, that the Cubans or Angolan troops have crossed the border into Zaire. We look on them as a friendly nation, and we have no obligations to them as far as military aid goes. But we have been cooperating in exchanging information with the Belgian Government, the French Government, and others, just to try to stabilize the situation and to lessen the chance of expanding the conflict


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With a Group of Publishers, Editors, and Broadcasters.
March 25, 1977

We've made some progress on many of the projects that we've undertaken: Government reorganization; zero-based budgeting; energy policy evolution; reorganization of the Energy Department; an effort in the Eastern Mediterranean, Turkey, Cyprus, and Greece; reestablish relationships with Vietnam; opening communications up with Cuba; a new start on SALT negotiations; a strengthening of our NATO position militarily; a reemphasis on close consultation with our allies and historical friends. These kinds of things are well underway



Organization of American States Address Before the Permanent Council.
April 14, 1977

Another problem which we must in a way address together is that of Cuba. We believe that normal conduct of international affairs and particularly the negotiation of differences require communication with all countries in the world. To these ends, we are seeking to determine whether relations with Cuba can be improved on a measured and a reciprocal basis


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With a Group of Publishers, Editors, and Broadcasters.
April 15, 1977

THE PRESIDENT. I have called publicly for the Cuban expeditionary force to be withdrawn from Africa. I read the whole text, of course, of Andy's statement, and what he said, I do agree with it. It Obviously stabilized the situation. And I think that the present Angolan Government under Neto is likely to stay in power. The Cubans ought to withdraw their forces from Africa. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I wouldn't say that it would be a precondition to the talks. We are talking to Cuba now for the first time in a number of years. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not say that before we ever had normal relations with Cuba they would have to withdraw every Cuban from other nations on Earth. We don't do it. I think we have got probably 1,200 different places around the world where we have some American troops. But the withdrawal of Cuban troops is a dominant factor in Angola and other places around Africa. They have troops in a lot of other countries besides-people, rather, I don't know about troops--in a lot of other countries. 
I just rather would not be pinned down so specifically on it. But the attitude of Cuba to withdraw its unwarranted intrusion into the affairs of Africa and other nations would be a prerequisite for normalization, yes


CLOSE-UP Program Remarks to Participants in the Program.
April 21, 1977

If I have a group of options in dealing with Turkey and Greece, or dealing with the Zairian problem, or dealing with the Middle East, or dealing with the SALT negotiations with the Soviet Union, or how to reopen relationships with Vietnam or Cuba or the People's Republic of China, I feel much more secure as President if I let the American people know what my thoughts are and let them know the facts about these international and very sensitive discussions. Because to the extent that the American people debate these issues, and to the extent that I can learn from the debate, I feel more sure that I will make theright decision. And when I do express an opinion or take a position with foreign leaders, I want to be sure that my position accurately represents what the American people are and what the American people want me to do


The President's News Conference
April 22, 1977
THE PRESIDENT. Let me--I can't certify to this because we don't have observers all over the Shaba region. Our best information is that the Katangans have been trained within Angola by the Cubans. We have no direct evidence at all that there are Cubans within Zaire



European Newspaper Journalists - Question-and-Answer Session.
April 25, 1977

There are no prohibitions now against American citizens traveling anywhere in the world, initiated by us. For the first time, Americans can go to North Korea, to Vietnam, to Cambodia, to Cuba. They couldn't a couple of months ago. We have removed the constraints in our own Nation on travel as well as from aliens


Radio-Television News Directors Association - Interview With Members of the Board of Directors of the Association
April 29, 1977

As we approach difficult decisions involving nonproliferation or SALT negotiations or our relationships with Vietnam or the People's Republic of China or Cuba,. or when we have a difficult question to resolve about a complicated international question like the Middle East, my own belief is that it's best for the American people to know what the options are, what my thinking is. And quite often, the things that I have said publicly have been long understood among those who negotiate or plan in secret




