MID 445101, North Korea

Remarks Following Discussions With Secretary General Lord Robertson of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and an Exchange With Reporters
October 21, 2002
President Bush. One, we had a bit of troubling news when we discovered the fact that, contrary to what we had been led to believe, that they were enriching uranium with the idea of developing a nuclear weapon. I say "troubling news," obviously, because we felt like they had given their word they weren't going to do this. 
I view this as an opportunity to work with our friends in the region and work with other countries in the region to ally against proliferation of serious weapons and to convince Kim Chong-il that he must disarm. To this end, I'm going to be talking to Jiang Zemin at Crawford. I look forward to a good discussion with the President of China about how we can work together to take our relationship to a new level in dealing with the true threats of the 21st century. 
I will see the leaders of Japan and South Korea and Russia the next day, in Mexico. I intend to make this an important topic of our discussions. This is a chance for people who love freedom and peace to work together to deal with a—to deal with an emerging threat. I believe we can deal with this threat peacefully, particularly if we work together. So this is an opportunity to work together. 
President Bush. You know, that's an operative word. We view this very seriously. It is a troubling discovery, and it's a discovery that we intend to work with our friends to deal with. I believe we can do it peacefully. I look forward to working with people to encourage them that we must convince Kim Chong-il to disarm for the sake of peace. And the people who have got the most at stake, of course, in this posture are the people who are his neighbors. 

The President's News Conference With President Jiang Zemin of China in Crawford, Texas
October 25, 2002
The President and I also discussed and expressed concern about the acknowledgment of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of a program to enrich uranium. We agreed that peace and stability in northeast Asia must be maintained. Both sides will continue to work towards a nuclear-weapons-free Korean Peninsula and a peaceful resolution of this issue.
Our first step, to make sure we resolve this peacefully, is to work with our friends, is to remind our friends of the dangers of a nuclear regime on the Korean Peninsula. President Jiang made it clear that China, like the United States, believes in a Korean Peninsula without nuclear weapons. 
This is a chance for the United States and China to work very closely together to achieve that vision of a nuclear free— nuclear-weapons-free peninsula. And so I've instructed Secretary Powell to work very closely with his counterpart, as well as with their counterparts in South Korea and Japan and Russia, to come up with a common strategy to convince Kim Chong-il to disarm. And we look forward to working to that end. 
And so to complete our—the important dialog of developing a strategy that will hold North Korea to account in terms of disarming, I'm going to be visiting with the Prime Minister of Japan and the leader of South Korea tomorrow in Mexico. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Vicente Fox of Mexico and an Exchange With Reporters in Los Cabos, Mexico
October 26, 2002
President Bush. Well, I'm glad you asked a senior administrative official. Our goal is to work with our friends in the region to convince Kim Chong-il to disarm. I made a positive step yesterday in Crawford when the President of China made a public declaration that—he said, "Like the United States, we share the desire to make sure the Korean Peninsula is nuclear weapons free." 
Right after this meeting with President Fox, I'll be meeting with the leaders of Japan and South Korea, where we'll continue this dialog. So the strategy is to make sure that our close friends and our allies and people with whom we've got relations work in concert to convince Mr. Kim Chong-il that a nuclear-weapons-free peninsula is in his interests; it's in South Korea's interests, and it is in the world's interests. 

The President's News Conference
November 7, 2002
The President. Is that the followup? [Laughter] Okay, that is the followup. I do care about North Korea. And as I said from the beginning of this new war in the 21st century, we'll deal with each threat differently. Each threat requires a different type of response. You've heard my strategy on dealing with Iraq. I've been very clear on the strategy all along, and tomorrow it looks like part of that strategy is coming to fruition. 
With North Korea, we're taking a different strategy, initially, and it's this, that we're going to work with countries in the neighborhood to convince North Korea that it is not in the world's interests that they develop a nuclear weapon through highly enriched uranium. 
We know they've got the capacity through plutonium. We have IAEA inspectors there watching carefully their plutonium stockpile. And then we discovered that, contrary to an agreement they had with the United States, they're enriching uranium, with the desire of developing a weapon. They admitted to this. And so, therefore, we have worked with our Japanese friends and South Korean friends, with the leadership in China—I will talk with Vladimir Putin about this after my trip to the NATO summit—to remind North Korea that if they expect to be a—welcomed into this family of peaceful nations, that they should not enrich uranium. 
I thought it was a very interesting statement that Jiang Zemin made in Crawford, where he declared very clearly that he wants a nuclear-weapons-free Korean Peninsula. That was, in my judgment, an important clarification of Chinese policy that I hope the North Koreans listen to. I believe we can achieve this objective, Helen, by working closely with this consortium of nations which have got a valid interest in seeing to it that North Korea does not have nuclear weapons. 


