MID 294601, US v Cuba, 26 dec 1970 to 25-Jan-71 to 6-Jul-71



6 - "A Conversation With the President," Interview With Four Representatives of the Television Networks
January 4, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I can tell you everything that our intelligence tells us, and we think it is very good in that area, because, as you know, we have surveillance from the air, which in this case is foolproof, we believe. 
First, let us look at what the understanding is. President Kennedy worked out an understanding in 1962 that the Russians would not put any offensive missiles into Cuba. That understanding was expanded on October I I [13] of this [last] year by the Russians when they said that it would include a military base in Cuba, and a military naval base. They, in effect, said that they would not put a military naval base into Cuba, on October 11 [13]. 
Now, in the event that nuclear submarines were serviced either in Cuba or from Cuba, that would be a violation of the understanding. That has not happened yet. We are watching the situation closely





61 - The President's News Conference
February 17, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. On December 10,2 you may recall, I said that if a nuclear submarine were serviced from Cuba or in Cuba, that this would be a violation of our understanding with regard to the Soviet Union's activities in putting offensive weapons or a base in Cuba. 
Now, as far as this submarine is concerned, the question is a rather technical one, whether it is there for a port call or whether it is there for servicing. We are watching it very closely. The Soviet Union is aware of the fact that we consider that there is an understanding and we will, of course, bring the matter to their attention if we find that the understanding is violated



144 - Panel Interview at the Annual Convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
April 16, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. Certainly not short-range. As far as long-range, until Cuba changes its policy toward us, we are not going to change our policy toward Cuba. Let me distinguish, Mr. Meyer, because coming from Miami I know you have a big Cuban readership, and they are torn-I mean they would like to be able to have some communication with their friends back in Cuba and yet they are concerned about the government, as you well know how strong they feel. 
Now, let's look at Cuba. As far as Castro is concerned, he has already drawn the line. He is exporting revolution all over the hemisphere, still exporting it. His line is against the United States, not only within Cuba but outside of Cuba. 
As long as Castro is adopting an antagonistic, anti-American line, we are certainly not going to normalize our relations with Castro. As soon as he changes his line toward us, we might consider it. But it is his move


