MID 428301, US v. Afghanistan
Jul 17 to Aug 16, 2001 – Nov 15, 2001


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the United States Response to the Terrorist Attacks of September 11
September 20, 2001

This group and its leader, a person named Usama bin Laden, are linked to many other organizations in different countries, including the Egyptian Islamic Jihad and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. There are thousands of these terrorists in more than 60 countries. They are recruited from their own nations and neighborhoods and brought to camps in places like Afghanistan, where they are trained in the tactics of terror. They are sent back to their homes or sent to hide in countries around the world to plot evil and destruction. 
The leadership of Al Qaida has great influence in Afghanistan and supports the Taliban regime in controlling most of that country. In Afghanistan, we see Al Qaida's vision for the world. Afghanistan's people have been brutalized. Many are starving, and many have fled. Women are notallowed to attend school. You can be jailed for owning a television. Religion can be practiced only as their leaders dictate. A man can be jailed in Afghanistan if his beard is not long enough. 
The United States respects the people of Afghanistan—after all, we are currently its largest source of humanitarian aid—but we condemn the Taliban regime. It is not only repressing its own people; it is threatening people everywhere by sponsoring and sheltering and supplying terrorists. By aiding and abetting murder, the Taliban regime is committing murder. 
And tonight the United States of America makes the following demands on the Taliban: Deliver to United States authorities all the leaders of Al Qaida who hide in your land. Release all foreign nationals, including American citizens, you have unjustly imprisoned. Protect foreign journalists, diplomats, and aid workers in your country. Close immediately and permanently every terrorist training camp in Afghanistan, and hand over every terrorist and every person in their support structure to appropriate authorities. Give the United States full access to terrorist training camps, so we can make sure they are no longer operating. 
These demands are not open to negotiation or discussion. The Taliban mustact and act immediately. They will hand over the terrorists, or they will share in their fate


Remarks on United States Financial Sanctions Against Terrorists and Their Supporters and an Exchange With Reporters
September 24, 2001

In terms of activities within Afghanistan, I'm not going to talk about those. I will not jeopardize our mission in any way by talking about military or in-country plans. We have a responsibility as an administration to speak as candidly as we can to the American people, but without jeopardizing life. And so, therefore, we will be willing to discuss that very important question at an appropriate time, and now is not the appropriate time


Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan and an Exchange With Reporters
September 25, 2001

President Bush. We have no issue and no anger toward the citizens of Afghanistan. We have, obviously, serious problems with the Taliban Government. They're an incredibly repressive government, a government that has a value system that's hard for many in America, or in Japan for that matter, to relate to—incredibly repressive toward women. 
They have made the decision to harbor terrorists. The mission is to rout terrorists, to find them and bring them to justice. Or, as I explained to the Prime Minister in western terms, to smoke them out of their caves, to get them running so we can get them. 
The best way to do that, and one way to do that, is to ask for the cooperation of citizens within Afghanistan who may be tired of having the Taliban in place or tired of having Usama bin Laden, people from foreign soils, in their own land, willing to finance this repressive government. 
I understand the reality of what's taking place inside Afghanistan, and we're going to have a—listen, as I've told the Prime Minister, we're angry, but we've got a clear vision. We're upset, but we know what we've got to do. And the mission is to bring these particular terrorists to justice and, at the same time, send a clear signal, Terry [Terry Moran, ABC News], that says if you harbor a terrorist, if you aid a terrorist, if you hide terrorists, you're just as guilty as the terrorists. 
And this is an administration—we're not into nation-building; we're focused on justice. And we're going to get justice. It's going to take a while, probably. But I'm a patient man. Nothing will diminish my will and my determination—nothing


Remarks Prior to Discussions With King Abdullah II of Jordan and an Exchange With Reporters
September 28, 2001

President Bush. Well, one of the things we will do is enforce the doctrine, part of the doctrine that says, if you harbor a terrorist, you're just as guilty as a terrorist. And in my speech to the Nation, I laid out the conditions that we expect the current Government of Afghanistan to follow. 
I am fully aware of the difficulties the Russians had in Afghanistan. Our intelligence people and our State Department people are also fully aware. It is very hard to fight a conventional war—a guerrilla war with conventional forces. And we understand that. That's why I have explained to the American people that the new war on terror is going to be a different war. It will be fought on a variety of fronts. It will be fought on a financial front. It will require the best of intelligence and the sharing of intelligence. There may or may not be a conventional component to it. 
I said loud and clear, sometimes people will be able to see what we do on the television screens. Other times the American people won't be able to see what we're doing. But make no mistake about it; we're in hot pursuit. We're going to enforce the doctrine. We're going to be diligent and patient and determined to bring people to justice and to rout out terrorist activity around the world. 
And so there have been lessons learned in the past, and our Government is very aware of those lessons. 
President Bush. First of all—I'll answer first, and then Your Majesty. First, there is nonegotiations with the Taliban. They heard what I said. And now they can act. And it's not just Mr. bin Laden that we expect to see and brought to justice; it's everybody associated with his organization that's in Afghanistan. And not only those directly associated with Mr. bin Laden, any terrorist that is housed and fed in Afghanistan needs to be handed over. And finally, we expect there to be complete destruction of terrorist camps. That's what I told them; that's what I mean. And we expect them— we expect them to not only hear what I say but to do something about it. 


The President's Radio Address
September 29, 2001
International cooperation is gaining momentum. This week I met with the Prime Ministers of two of America's closest friends, Canada and Japan. Other countries, from Russia to Indonesia, are giving strong support as the war against terrorism moves forward. America is grateful to the nations that have cut off diplomatic ties with the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, which is sheltering terrorists. The United States respects the people of Afghanistan, and we are their largest provider of humanitarian aid. But we condemn the Taliban and welcome the support of other nations in isolating that regime


Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
October 2, 2001

Secondly, there is no timetable for the Taliban, just like there are nonegotiations. I have said that the Taliban must turn over Al Qaida organization living within Afghanistan and must destroy the terrorist camps. And they must do so; otherwise, there will be a consequence. There are nonegotiations; there's no calendar. We'll act on our time, and we'll do it in a manner that not only secures the United States as best as possible but makes the freedom in the world more likely to exist in the futur


Remarks to Department of State Employees
October 4, 2001

I'm also here to announce an initiative to help the Afghan people in a time of crisis and in a time of need. America will stand strong and will oppose the sponsors of terror, and America will stand strong and help those people who are hurt by those regimes

We have great compassion, however, for the millions around the world who are victims of hate, of victims of oppressive government, including the people who live in Afghanistan. Today I'm announcing, along with the Secretary of State, that America will contribute an additional $320 million in humanitarian assistance for Afghans for more food, more medicine, to help the innocent people of Afghanistan deal with the coming winter. This is our way of saying that while we firmly and strongly oppose the Taliban regime, we are friends of the Afghan people. 
We will work with the U.N. agencies such as the World Food Program and work with private volunteer organizations to make sure this assistance gets to the people. We will make sure that not only the folks in Afghanistan who need help get help, but we will help those who have fled to neighboring countries to get help as well. 
There's no question that we're an angry people about what happened to our country. But in our anger, we must never forget we're a compassionate people as well. We willfight evil, but in order to overcome evil, the great goodness of America must come forth and shine forth. And one way to do so is to help the poor souls in Afghanistan. And we're going to do so


Remarks to Department of Labor Employees
October 4, 2001

Instead, they have provided interesting opportunities for America. I told some world leaders, through our tears we see opportunity; that we're sad and angry, but we've got a clear vision of the world; that this is a remarkable moment in history which our Nation will seize. We'll act boldly at home to encourage economic growth. We'll take care of people who hurt. We will comfort those who lost lives. We'll be compassionate as to how we deal with Afghan citizens, for example, by making sure there's humanitarian aid


The President's Radio Address
October 6, 2001
Afghanistan is a case in point. Its Taliban regime has made that nation into a sanctuary and training ground for international terrorists, terrorists who have killed innocent citizens of many nations, including our own. The Taliban promotes terror abroad and practices terror against its people, oppressing women and persecuting all who dissent. 
The Taliban has been given the opportunity to surrender all the terrorists in Afghanistan and to close down their camps and operations. Full warning has been given, and time is runningout. 
The Afghan people, however, are the victims of oppression, famine, and misrule. Many refugees from that unfortunate nation are on the move, and sadly, many Afghans are on the verge of starvation. 
America respects the Afghan people, their long tradition, and their proud independence, and we will help them in this time of confusion and crisis in their country. 
America has long been the largest source of food and humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan. This week I announced an additional $320 million in aid to the Afghan people, to those within Afghanistan and those who have fled across borders. Despite efforts by the Taliban to disrupt these critical aid shipments, we will deliver food and seeds, vaccines and medicine by truck and even by draft animals. Conditions permitting, we will bring help directly to the people of Afghanistan by airdrops. 
This aid will help Afghans make it through the upcoming winter. For the longer term, I urge Congress to make funds available so that one day the United States can contribute, along with other friends of Afghanistan, to the reconstruction and development of that troubled nation. 
In the struggle ahead, we will act in accordance with American ideals. We're offering help and friendship to the Afghan people. It is their Taliban rulers and the terrorists they harbor who have much to fear

Address to the Nation Announcing Strikes Against Al Qaida Training Camps and Taliban Military Installations in Afghanistan
October 7, 2001

Good afternoon. On my orders, the United States military has begun strikes against Al Qaida terrorist training camps and military installations of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. These carefully targeted actions are designed to disrupt the use of Afghanistan as a terrorist base of operations and to attack the military capability of the Taliban regime. 
We are joined in this operation by our staunch friend Great Britain. Other close friends, including Canada, Australia, Germany, and France, have pledged forces as the operation unfolds. More than 40 countries in the Middle East, Africa, Europe, and across Asia have granted air transit or landing rights. Many more have shared intelligence. We are supported by the collective will of the world. 
More than 2 weeks ago, I gave Taliban leaders a series of clear and specific demands: Close terrorist training camps; hand over leaders of the Al Qaida network; and return all foreign nationals, including American citizens, unjustly detained in your country. None of these demands were met. And now the Taliban will pay a price. By destroying camps and disrupting communications, we will make it more difficult for the terror network to train new recruits and coordinate their evil plans. 
Initially, the terrorists may burrow deeper into caves and other entrenched hiding places. Our military action is also designed to clear the way for sustained, comprehensive, and relentless operations to drive them out and bring them to justice. 
At the same time, the oppressed people of Afghanistan will know the generosity of America and our allies. As we strike military targets, we'll also drop food, medicine, and supplies to the starving and suffering men and women and children of Afghanistan. 
The United States of America is a friend to the Afghan people, and we are the friends of almost a billion worldwide who practice the Islamic faith. The United States of America is an enemy of those who aid terrorists and of the barbaric criminals who profane a great religion by committing murder in its name. 
This military action is a part of our campaign against terrorism, another front in a war that has already been joined through diplomacy, intelligence, the freezing of financial assets, and the arrests of known terrorists by law enforcement agents in 38 countries. Given the nature and reach of our enemies, we will win this conflict by the patient accumulation of successes, by meeting a series of challenges with determination and will and purpose. 
Today we focus on Afghanistan, but the battle is broader. Every nation has a choice to make. In this conflict, there is no neutral ground. If any government sponsors the outlaws and killers of innocents, they have become outlaws and murderers, themselves. And they will take that lonely path at their own peril. 
I'm speaking to you today from the Treaty Room of the White House, a place where American Presidents have worked for peace. We're a peaceful nation. Yet, as we have learned so suddenly and so tragically, there can be no peace in a world of sudden terror. In the face of today's new threat, the only way to pursue peace is to pursue those who threaten it. 
We did not ask for this mission, but we will fulfill it. The name of today's military operation is Enduring Freedom. We defend not only our precious freedoms but also the freedom of people everywhere to live and raise their children free from fear. 
In the months ahead, our patience will be one of our strengths: patience with the long waits that will result from tighter security; patience and understanding that it will take time to achieve our goals; patience in all the sacrifices that may come. 
This is a precious gift, the greatest she could give. This young girl knows what America is all about. Since September 11, an entire generation of young Americans has gained new understanding of the value of freedom and its cost in duty and in sacrifice. 
The battle is now joined on many fronts. We will not waver; we will not tire; we will not falter; and we will not fail. Peace and freedom will prevail

Remarks Following Discussions With Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder of Germany and an Exchange With Reporters
October 9, 2001

Secondly, as you know, we've started conventional operations. And I believe Secretary Rumsfeld summed it up pretty well today when he made it clear that the skies were now free for U.S. planes to fly without being harassed in any way and that the missions have been successful. 
And as to whether or not we will put troops on the ground, I'm not going to tell you. I think it's—you've got to understand, we will not share intelligence, nor will we talk about military plans that we may or may not have in the future
The President. Yes. Well, Steve, I don't know who told the Pakistani President that. Generally, you know, we don't talk about military plans. And there is one way to shorten the campaign in Afghanistan, and that's for the—Usama bin Laden and his leadership to be turned over so they can be brought to justice. 
We will have a sustained effort. But I want to remind you that this is a part of a larger effort, that our war, the war of freedom-loving people, such as the Germans and the Americans, is against terrorists as a whole. And this is one part of a large campaign. We—the coalition has arrested over 200 people that have been associated with the Al Qaida organization. All around the world, freedom-loving people are gathering information, sharing information, and bringing people to justice
The President. Ours is a compassionate nation, as is Germany. We're both combining our resources to help people in need. There are thousands of starving Afghans, because there is a Taliban Government in place that has caused starvation and deprivation and discrimination. And they are now housing terrorists. And make no mistake about it: The doctrine that says if you house a terrorist, you're just as guilty as a terrorist, will stand. We're making that very evident to the world as we speak



Remarks Following Discussions With Secretary General Lord Robertson of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
October 10, 2001

Today, NATO nations are acting together in a broad campaign against terror. Britain is side by side with us in Afghanistan. The nations of NATO are sharing intelligence, coordinating law enforcement, and cracking down on the financing of terrorist organizations. Some NATO members will provide logistic support to military operations, and others have offered to fight if we deem necessary


Remarks at the Department of Defense Service of Remembrance in Arlington, Virginia
October 11, 2001

This week, I have called the Armed Forces into action. One by one, we are eliminating power centers of a regime that harbors Al Qaida terrorists. We gave that regime a choice: Turn over the terrorists, or face your ruin. They chose unwisely. 
The Taliban regime has brought nothing but fear and misery to the people of Afghanistan. These rulers call themselves holy men, even with their record of drawing money from heroin trafficking. They consider themselves pious and devout, while subjecting women to fierce brutality. 
The Taliban has allied itself with murderers and gave them shelter. But today, for Al Qaida and the Taliban, there is no shelter.


The President's News Conference
October 11, 2001
The men and women of the United States military are doing their duty with skill and success. We have ruined terrorist training camps, disrupted their communications, weakened the Taliban military, and destroyed most of their air defenses. We're mounting a sustained campaign to drive the terrorists out of their hidden caves and to bring them to justice. All missions are being executed according to plan on the military front. 
At the same time, we are showing the compassion of America by delivering food and medicine to the Afghan people, who are, themselves, the victims of a repressive regime
We've got a Homeland Security Office now running, as I mentioned, headed by Tom Ridge. We're sharing intelligence with our friends in countries from overseas. We follow every lead. And information-sharing between the CIA and the FBI is seamless, so that the reaction to any threat is realtime. But the truth of the matter is, in order to fully defend America, we must defeat the evildoers where they hide. We must round them up, and we must bring them to justice. And that's exactly what we're doing in Afghanistan, the first battle in the war of the 21st century

The President. We learned some very important lessons in Vietnam. Perhaps the most important lesson that I learned is that you cannot fight a guerrilla war with conventional forces. That's why I've explained to the American people that we're engaged in a different type of war, one obviously that will use conventional forces but one in which we've got to fight on all fronts. 
I remember saying to you all that the first shot in the war was when we started cutting off their money, because an Al Qaida organization can't function without money. And we're continuing our efforts to reach out to willing nations to disrupt and seize assets of the Al Qaida organization. 
We are in the process of rounding up Al Qaida members around the world. There are Al Qaida organizations in, roughly, 68 countries. And over 200 have now been apprehended. And every time I talk to a world leader, I urge them to continue finding the Al Qaida representatives and bring them to justice. 
As far as the use of conventional forces, we've got a clear plan, and it's to say to the host government that you have been given your chance—and by the way, I gave them ample opportunity to turn over Al Qaida. I made it very clear to them, in no uncertain terms, that in order to avoid punishment, they should turn over the parasites that hide in their country. They obviously refused to do so, and now they're paying a price. We are dismantling their military, disrupting their communications, severing their ability to defend themselves. And slowly but surely, we're smoking Al Qaida out of their caves so we can bring them to justice. 
People often ask me, how long will this last? This particular battlefront will last as long as it takes to bring Al Qaida to justice. It may happen tomorrow; it may happen a month from now; it may take a year or 2. But we will prevail. And what the American people need to know is what our allies know: I am determined to staythecourse. And we must do so. We must do so. We must rid the world of terrorists so our children and grandchildren can grow up in freedom. It is essential. It is now our time to act, and I'm proud to lead a country that understands that
Our focus is on Afghanistan and the terrorist network hiding in Afghanistan, right now. But as well, we're looking for Al Qaida cells around the world. If we find an Al Qaida cell operating, we will urge the host country to bring them to justice, and we're having some progress—we're making progress

I am confident that the Al Qaida organization is moving around Afghanistan. They think they might find safe haven? Not if we think they're there. And we've got them on the run. 
And he thought his—this is an interesting case in Afghanistan because it's—he thought he had hijacked a country. He actually did for a while. He forced a country to accept his radical thoughts. And it became a safe haven for bin Laden and the Al Qaida organization. It's no longer a safe haven, that's for sure, because of our military activity, David.



Remarks to the March of Dimes Volunteer Leadership Conference
October 12, 2001

I'm also here to ask Americans for a good deed, something the children of America can do to help the children of Afghanistan

Nor is our war against global terrorism a war against the people of Afghanistan. The Afghan people are victims of oppression and misrule of the Taliban regime. There are few places on Earth that face greater misery. One out of every four children dies before the age of 5 in Afghanistan. It is estimated that one in every three children in Afghanistan is an orphan. Almost half suffer from chronic malnutrition; millions face the threat of starvation. The situation is so bad, so bad, that we read about 3-year-old children in Afghanistan who weigh less than the average newborn in America. 
We're trying to get food to starving Afghans. In contrast, the Taliban regime, those who house the evildoers, has harnessed international aid—harassed international aid workers and chased them out of their country. The people of Afghanistan have suffered too long under Taliban rule. 
That suffering provides us with a task. I'm asking every child in America to give not a dime but a dollar to a specific cause, a relief effort for the children of Afghanistan. And I want to report to the Nation that after I laid out this initiative last night, and confirming it here at your convention, that I've received the first dollar. [Laughter] It came from Justin Washington. 
I know Justin pretty well. [Laughter] I got to see him in the Oval Office, and he made it clear, his boots were better than mine. [Laughter] But Justin, I want to thank you. Justin knows what I know: A dollar today is roughly equivalent to what a dime was in the late 1930s. It's an appropriate place to announce this initiative of compassion. 
I hope American children in their classrooms and families in their homes put a dollar in an envelope and send it to America's Fund for Afghan Children, to the White House, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue— [laughter]—Washington, DC 20509. [Laughter] Schools, community and youth organizations can organize events to raise money for this cause. And they can, at the same time, demonstrate compassion and mercy in this hour of need. This effort is an opportunity to help others while teaching our children a valuable lesson about service and character. 
We will work with the Red Cross to make sure the money is used for food and medicine, to make sure the money provides hope and help to the children of Afghanistan. We'll also coordinate with the Administrator of USAID to ensure that our efforts build on the important humanitarian work already being done. 
During the last month, Americans have been extraordinarily generous in their giving of time and money. We still face many needs and challenges at home. And that's why Americans should continue supporting community-based organizations like the March of Dimes, which is doing so much good all across the country. 
And Americans are the most generous people on Earth. And because the suffering is so great, I know we need to lend a hand to the children who live a world a halfway around the—a place a halfway around the world from here. By embracing Afghan children, we assert the American ideal. Our Nation is the greatest force for good in the world history. We value the lives and rights of all people. Our compassion and concern do not stop at our border. They reach across the world. 
Americans are determined to fight for our security, no question about it. And we're all equally determined to live up to our principles. And I hope, I hope all Americans will help us show those principles to the entire world


The President's Radio Address
October 13, 2001
In last week's radio address, I warned that time was runningout for the Taliban to turn over the terrorists they shelter. They did not listen, and they are paying a price. 
On Sunday American and British forces launched strikes at terrorist camps and Taliban military targets in Afghanistan. Our men and women in uniform are performing as they always do, with skill and courage, and they have achieved the goals of the first phase of our campaign. We have disrupted the terrorist network inside Afghanistan. We have weakened the Taliban's military, and we have crippled the Taliban's air defenses. American forces dominate the skies over Afghanistan, and we will use that dominance to make sure terrorists can no longer freely use Afghanistan as a base of operations. 
This campaign will not be completed in one attack. Our enemy prefers to attack the helpless. He hides from our soldiers. But we're making a determined effort to take away his hiding places. The best defense against terrorism is a strong offensive against terrorists. That work continues. 
Yet, I have one more task, one especially for America's children. I urge you to show the best of America by directly helping the children of Afghanistan who are suffering from the oppression and misrule of their own Government. Many are malnourished; many are starving. 
Put a dollar in an envelope. Mark it, "America's Fund for Afghan Children," and send it here to the White House, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, DC 20509-1600. Working with the American Red Cross, we will get that money to Afghan children in need. 
This is something the children of America can do for the children of Afghanistan, even as we oppose the brutal Taliban regime. We will oppose their evil with firm justice, and we will answer their hatred with compassion for the Afghan people



Exchange With Reporters on Returning From Camp David, Maryland
October 14, 2001

The President. Turn him over. Turn him over; turn his cohorts over; turn any hostages they hold over; destroy all the terrorist camps. There's no need to negotiate. There's no discussions. I told them exactly what they need to do. And there's no need to discuss innocence or guilt. We know he's guilty. Turn him over. If they want us to stop our military operations, they've just got to meet my conditions. Now, when I said nonegotiation, I meant nonegotiation. 
The President. I don't know what the offer is. All they've got to do is turn him over, and his colleagues and the stocks he hides, as well as destroy his camps, and the innocent people being held hostage in Afghanistan. 
The President. There's nonegotiation— they must have not heard—there's nonegotiation. This is nonnegotiable. These people, if they're interested in us stopping our military operations—we will do so if they meet the conditions that I outlined in my speech to the United States Congress. It's as simple as that. There's nothing to negotiate about. They're harboring a terrorist, and they need to turn him over—and not only turn him over, turn the Al Qaida organization over, destroy all the terrorist camps—actually, we're doing a pretty good job of that right now—and release the hostages they hold. That's all they've got to do, but there is nonegotiation, period.


Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and an Exchange With Reporters
October 15, 2001

President Bush. I haven't see a report yet, John [John King, Cable News Network]. And I think it is very important that India and Pakistan stand down during our activities in Afghanistan—down, for that matter, forever. 
But I am—I need to find out more about the report; I will find out more about the report. As you noted, our Secretary of State is in the region. One reason he's there is to talk to both sides about making sure that there is no—that if there are tensions—and obviously, there are—that they be reduced, that we are mindful that activities around Kashmir could create issues in that part of the region, particularly as we're conducting our operations in Afghanistan.



Remarks on America's Fund for Afghan Children
October 16, 2001

Thank you all very much. Last week I asked America's children to send a dollar to the White House to help provide food and medicine to the children of Afghanistan. Today I'm pleased to report that in just a few short days, children all across our country have responded with remarkable generosity and deep compassion. 
I want to thank Dr. Healy for doing such a fine job as the president of the American Red Cross. I'm proud to be your chairman. And I want to thank Kristen. In my speech to the country the other night, I said, "Why don't you go out and mow a lawn or do somebody a favor to earn a dollar." Never did I think feeding chickens would be part—[laughter]—but she fed so many chickens, she told me, she raised $45 for the children of Afghanistan. Good job. 
Let me tell you, since Friday, we've had 90,000 pieces of mail—90,000—have arrived at the White House. Dr. Healy, the American Red Cross, working with the U.S. Agency for International Development, are making sure that every dollar—every single dollar—that's been raised by the boys and girls of America will be spent on the needs of the boys and girls in Afghanistan. For the people that work hard either feeding chickens or going door to door or having bake drives, you can rest assured that Dr. Healy is going to make sure the money goes where we want the money to go. 
Winter arrives early in Afghanistan. It's cold, really cold, and the children need warm clothing. And they need food, and they need medicines. And thanks to the American children, fewer children in Afghanistan will suffer this winter. 
That's such a beautiful spirit, and it's so important that our boys and girls of America understand that when you share with somebody else, it not only enriches your life, it enriches the life of our entire Nation. Everybody can make a contribution in the war against evildoers. And by helping a child in Afghanistan—is a very important contribution. 
Some students right here in Washington were among the first to respond. The student council at Amidon Elementary School in Washington organized their fellow students to donate dollars. They heard the call, and there was organization right off the bat. That means people were getting other people to go raise dollars on behalf of the Afghan children. 
Students at Crestwood Elementary—and I see some of their representatives right here on the front row—in Springfield, Virginia, donated—now, catch this—$2,000 from their annual fundraiser to the America's Fund for Afghan Children. I want to thank you all for coming, and thank you for your generosity. 
And what an amazing contrast it is for our children to help children in need in Afghanistan. It points up how ugly and repressive the Taliban Government is of Afghanistan. And the message stands in stark contrast to the message of hate that our boys and girls have seen on TV, a message, frankly, that's hard for a lot of our kids in America to understand. Why would somebody hate so badly that they would fly airplanes to take a life? Why? Why is it that people send ugly things through the mail? 
And my answer is: There's evil in the world, but we can overcome evil. We're good. We're good-hearted people, and the boys and girls of America are showing the world just that. We don't fight a religion. No, we fight evil. We respect the Muslim culture. We know Islam is a religion that teaches love and peace and compassion. No, our struggle is against evil people— evil people that claim they're religious but are not. 


Interview With Asian Editors
October 16, 2001
The President. Well, let me say that the last time the Prime Minister was here, he told me that the Japanese had dedicated $40 million to relief in Afghanistan. And I praised him here, in front of the American press corps, for that generous contribution. 
I think that goes to show that Prime Minister Koizumi understands there is an international role for a stable Afghanistan. I understand that we need to worry about what Afghanistan looks like and that we must restore a sense of stability in that country and take care of the poor people that have been victimized by the Taliban regime. 
On the other hand, I want to assure everybody my focus is on achieving the objective, which is bringing the Al Qaida organization hiding in Afghanistan to justice and holding the Government that harbors them accountable as well. 
But I appreciate Japan's role. I appreciate the Prime Minister's understanding of the need not only to provide short-term relief, like we are as well, but also to be a part of a longer term solution in Afghanistan. He understands that, and for that, I'm grateful
The President. We will fulfill our obligations to the South Korean people and to our pact with South Korea. North Korea should not in any way, shape, or form think that because we happen to be engaged in Afghanistan, we will not be prepared and ready to fulfill our end of our agreement with the South Korean Government. They should not use this as an opportunity to threaten our close friend and ally South Korea



Remarks at the California Business Association Breakfast in Sacramento, California
October 17, 2001

They are hearing from a compassionate nation, a nation that sends food and medicine to starving people of Afghanistan, a nation whose children—and I know we've got some here who have raised money at the elementary school—whose children are sending their dollars to save the children of Afghanistan. They are hearing from a tolerant nation, a nation that respects Islam and values our many Muslim citizens. They are hearing from a prayerful nation, a nation that prays to an almighty God for protection and for peace. And they are hearing from a patient and determined nation, a nation that will continue this war for as long as it takes to win

We'll do whateverittakes it takes to defeat terror abroad, wherever it grows or wherever it hides. In Afghanistan, our Armed Forces are performing their duty with skill and success. We've destroyed many terrorist camps. We've damaged the Taliban's air defenses. We've seriously weakened all those in Afghanistan who wish to inflict harm on people anywhere in the world. 
We're paving the way for friendly troops to defeat the Taliban and root out the Al Qaida parasites that the Taliban hosts and protects. We're enforcing the doctrine that says this: If you harbor the terrorists, you are guilty of terror, and like the terrorists, you will be held responsible


Remarks to the Community at Travis Air Force Base, California
October 17, 2001

And that's what's happening in Afghanistan. I gave the people in Afghanistan a choice. I said to the Taliban, "Turn them over. Destroy the camps. Free people you're unjustly holding." I said, "You've got time to do it." But they didn't listen. They didn't respond, and now they're paying a price. They are learning that anyone who strikes America will hear from our military, and they're not going to like what they hear. In choosing their enemy, the evildoers and those who harbor them have chosen their fate. 
We don't quarrel with the innocent folks of Afghanistan; they're not our enemy. Nor is any religion the enemy of the United States of America. The evil ones have tried to hijack a religion to justify their murder. But I want to assure the people of the world that our military fights not against Muslims or fights not against the Islam religion. We fight against evil people. We fight against people who believe that they can harm the United States of America. We fight against people who have no country, no ideology; they're motivated by hate. 
As I walked up, I saw some of the schoolchildren here holding dollar bills. We've got schoolchildren all across the country out raising a dollar to send to the children of Afghanistan. We've got boys and girls from all religions and all walks of life who have heard the call to love a neighbor just as they'd like to be loved themselves



Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Kim Dae-jung of South Korea and an Exchange With Reporters in Shanghai
October 19, 2001

President Bush. First of all, my Government and, I know, the leaders involved in the coalition are worried about the suffering in Afghanistan. The Taliban Government is seizing food. The Taliban Government refuses to allow for an efficient distribution of aid that has been assembled to help the Afghan people. 
We will continue our military operations in such a way that it will not disrupt the delivery of food. And not only that, as a matter of fact, concurrent with our military operations will be the distribution of food. But the world must understand that the primary reason why food is not making it to starving people is the Taliban. If they were that interested in serving as representatives of the people, they would be encouraging the distribution of food. 
We will continue to do everything we can to make sure that ourcommitment to aid to the Afghan people is fulfilled. We are the leading country, in terms of providing aid to the Afghan people. I have increased our budget from $170 million to—or asked to increase the budget to over $300 million of aid. 
Our beef is not with the Afghan people. Our beef is with a repressive government that houses, aids, and abets terrorists. 


The President's News Conference With President Jiang Zemin of China in Shanghai, China
October 19, 2001

President Bush. First, I spent some time explaining to the President of my determination to bring people to justice that murdered our citizens. And I told the President that our Nation will do what it takes to bring them to justice, no matter how long it takes. And Ron [Ron Fournier, Associated Press], I don't know the time, but I do know the desire. 
And secondly, I explained to the President that we will hold people accountable who harbor terrorists. And that's exactly what we're doing. 
I will not comment upon military operations. I made it very clear from the outset of this campaign that I will not respond to rumors and information that seeps into the public consciousness, for fear of disrupting the operations that are taking place. But let me reiterate what I've told the American people and the world: We will use whatevermeansarenecessary to achieve our objective


Remarks at the Chief Executive Officers Summit in Shanghai
October 20, 2001

The most visible part of our response is taking place in Afghanistan. The Taliban regime has allied itself with murderers. I gave Taliban leaders a choice: Turn over the terrorists, or face your ruin. They chose unwisely. 
Yet, even as we oppose the Taliban, we seek friendship with the Afghan people. Our military actions are accompanied by food drops. We have substantially increased aid to Afghanistan. My Government supports international efforts to bring help and stability and peace to that unfortunate nation. 
There's frustration about the delivery of food and medicine and help in Afghanistan. I share that frustration. The guilty ones are the Taliban. They disrupt; they steal; they prevent supplies of food from delivery. They starve their people, and that is another reason they must go


Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of Japan and an Exchange With Reporters in Shanghai, China
October 20, 2001

President Bush. Well, we had a very good visit today. He is concerned about the death of innocent people in Afghanistan, and I assured him I am, too. Our beef is not with the Afghan people. Our beef is with a government that houses and feeds and tries to hide terrorists. And I assured him that our campaign was—that we were trying to be as careful as we possibly could to achieve our military objective. 
Secondly, I want the American people to understand that we're a compassionate Government. We're spending a great deal of money to help the people of Afghanistan. And I'm concerned about the fact that food isn't getting to some Afghan citizens, and the reason why is, is because the Taliban is preventing food distribution. They're disrupting food; they're stealing food. These are people that are willing to starve their people, which is yet another reason why the Taliban must go. 
President Bush. The success of the mission in general. We're making great progress. We're making great progress. As you know, I'm not going to comment on a specific operation. I will tell you, though, that we're using all the resources of the country. And in general, we're making very good progress. We're pleased with the progress being made


The President's News Conference With President Vladimir Putin of Russia in Shanghai
October 21, 2001

President Bush. I think I listened to probably 3 or 4 hours of discussions about our campaign against terrorism. And there was a very strong support for our activities, strong support for sharing intelligence, strong support for the diplomatic front we're waging, strong support to disrupt the financial operations of the terrorists, and strong support for our military operations in Afghanistan



Remarks Prior to a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
October 23, 2001

I do know that this country is strong enough to endure, to endure the evil ones. And we're making great progress on the ground in Afghanistan, and we'll bring the Al Qaida to justice, and we'll—we're doing everything we can to find out who mailed these letters


Remarks to Employees of the Dixie Printing and Packaging Corporation in Glen Burnie, Maryland
October 24, 2001

As you know, I have asked our military to take an active role in the campaign. I set out a doctrine to America that said the following: Not only will we hold terrorists accountable for their activities, we will also hold those accountable, those nations accountable that harbor them, that hide them, that try to feed them. And that's exactly what we're doing in Afghanistan. 
I gave the Afghan Government, the Taliban Government, plenty of time to respond to the demands of the United States. I said, "You must hand over the Al Qaida leadership which hides in your country." I said, "You must free those who you illegally detain in your country." And I said, "You must destroy the camps that have been used to train the terrorists." And they had time to respond, and they didn't respond positively, and therefore, they're paying a price. 
Our military is conducting a campaign to bring the terrorists to justice, not to harm the Afghan people. While we are holding the Taliban Government accountable, we're also feeding Afghan people. You need to be proud of the United States military. It's doing its job. It is slowly but surely encircling the terrorists so that we'll bring them to justice. We're patient. We're firm. We have got a strategy that is going to work. And make no mistake about it, justice will be done


Remarks at the Thurgood Marshall Extended Elementary School
October 25, 2001

Rod Paige mentioned the fact that we've got a—we've asked boys and girls all across America to contribute a dollar to help feed and provide medicine for Afghan children who are suffering. The response has been great, and I can't thank the boys and girls of America enough. That's one initiative. The initiative we're announcing today is a second initiative, all to send a message about the goodness and decency of our great country



Remarks to Business, Trade, and Agricultural Leaders
October 26, 2001

The press often ask me, "Well, is this the—is the evil one hiding from us in Afghanistan, the ones who have done this to America?" I said, "I don't know." We don't know yet. But we do know the evil one who hides thinks in ways that we can't possibly think in America—so destructive, such a low regard for human life. And anybody who puts anthrax, trying to kill American citizens, shares the same set of values. Whoever has done it shares that same value of evil that we saw on September the 11th. And we'll find them and bring them to justice, as well.


Remarks Following a Meeting With the Homeland Security Council and an Exchange With Reporters
October 29, 2001

The American people are beginning to understand that we fight a two-front war against terror. We fight in Afghanistan, and I appreciate so very much the efforts of our men and women who wear the uniform. And we fight it at home here, to make sure America is as safe is possible

The President. I think the most important thing that the American people realize is that we're steady and determined and patient, that we've got a strategy in place to bring Al Qaida to justice and at the same time make it clear that any nation which harbors terrorists will be held accountable for their decisions. And we are implementing our strategy, and we appreciate any suggestions people may have. 
But the strategy we have at the time right now is to use our military to dismantle Taliban defenses, use our military to destroy Al Qaida training bases, and to work with troops that now exist on the ground to fulfill our mission. And I am pleased with the progress we're making. 
And I'm really pleased with the fact that the American people are patient. They realize this is a war the likes of which they have never seen before. And therefore, they are rooting on their Government and the men and women who wear the uniform. They understand that it's going to take a while to achieve our objective, and I appreciate that patience



Remarks Announcing the Lessons of Liberty Initiative in Rockville, Maryland
October 30, 2001

As we pursue the enemy in Afghanistan, we feed the innocents. As we try to bring justice to those who have harmed us, we find those who need help. The events of these 7 weeks have shown something else. They have shown a new generation, your generation, that America and the cause of freedom have determined enemies, that there are people in this world who hate what America stands for. They hate our success; they hate our liberty. We have learned all too suddenly that there are evil people who have no regard for human life and will do whateverittakes to try to bring this mighty Nation to its knees

Our Nation gave those who harbor the Al Qaida organization ample opportunity to respond to reasonable demands. Our demands were just, and they were fair. We said very simply, "Turn over Al Qaida. Send the terrorists out of your land. Release the innocent Americans and other foreigners you hold hostage in Afghanistan, and destroy Al Qaida terrorist camps and training activity camps." And we gave them ample opportunity to respond, and they chose the wrong course. And then—they will now pay a price for choosing the wrong course


Remarks Following Discussions With President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria and an Exchange With Reporters
November 2, 2001

And the American people fully understand that we're in for a long struggle. And I appreciate the patience of the American people. We are making progress overseas in Afghanistan. We're slowly but surely tightening the net on the enemy. We're making it harder for the enemy to communicate. We're making it harder for the enemy to protect himself. We're making it harder for the enemy to hide. And we're going to get him—and them.

President Bush. Terry [Terry Moran, ABC News], we've been at this part of the battle for a couple of weeks. And as I explained to the American people, this is going to be a long struggle. And I am very satisfied, and the American people should be satisfied, with the progress we're making on the ground. 
The Taliban's air defenses have been completely demolished. Their assets, whatever assets they had, have been demolished, and we're slowly but surely tightening the net to achieve our objective. This is a different kind of war. The country has been used to Desert Storm, or have been used to Kosovo, where we were able to have massive formations marching across the desert and/or simply an air campaign that eventually brought a country to its knees. This is a different type of struggle, and our strategy reflects that. And I believe the American people understand that and are very patient, as am I. 
I am mindful of the objective; the military is mindful of the objective in Afghanistan. But the objective goes beyond just Afghanistan. That's why we're working on the financial front to cut off money. That's why I have encouraged nations all around the world to apprehend those who are known terrorists, and over 280 have been arrested thus far. 
That's why this coalition is so important, that it remain strong, to raise the risk for those who would like to conduct terrorist activities. That's why we're standing in solidarity with the Philippines, for example, that's working hard to get rid of Abu Sayyaf. 
In other words, this is a global battle. There happens to be two known fronts, two visible fronts: one, Afghanistan; and the other, the United States of America. And we're making good progress on both fronts

Remarks Following Discussions With President Jacques Chirac of France and an Exchange With Reporters
November 6, 2001

We recognize that our war against terror is more than just military action in Afghanistan, that we have an obligation to help feed the innocent people in Afghanistan, and that we've got to make sure that there is a post-Taliban government that reflects the values of both our countries. And so we had a good discussion and it's—I value the advice of the President. I value his friendship. And I'm so glad he came back to the country

President Bush. This morning I did say that Usama bin Laden, Al Qaida were seeking to develop weaponry that—weapons of mass destruction. And the reason I said that is because I was using his own words. He announced that this was his intention. And I believe we need to take him seriously. We will do everything we can to make sure he does not acquire the means to deliver weapons of mass destruction. If he doesn't have them, we will work hard to make sure he doesn't; if he does, we'll make sure he doesn't deploy them. And that's why it is so important that we continue our search for Al Qaida in Afghanistan, to hunt them down, to get them on the run, and to bring them to justice. 
But this is an evil man that we're dealing with. And I wouldn't put it past him to develop evil weapons to try to harm civilization as we know it. And that's why our coalition is—that's why I work hard to keep our coalition bound together. And that's why we're going to keep relentless military pressure on him in Afghanistan. And that's why we must prevail. That's why we must win


Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom and an Exchange With Reporters
November 7, 2001

We've had a great discussion about progress in Afghanistan. I fully believe we're making great progress. I told the American people many times, and I've told the press corps many times that this is a struggle that's going to take a while, that it's not one of these Kodak moments. There is no moment to this; this is a long struggle and a different kind of war. But we're patient, and our close friends are patient, which is bad news for the Taliban and the people they harbor. 
Secondly, we talked a lot about making sure that our great compassion for the innocents in Afghanistan is fulfilled. We must feed the people. And the Prime Minister has—every time I've talked to him, which is a lot, is constantly talking about how we make sure that we fulfill the mission, not only military but fulfill the mission of helping people in need. And also, we continue to discuss the vision of a post-Taliban Afghanistan and how do we make sure that all parties involved in that part of the world have a stake in the future. He's got a clear vision; he is a strong friend; and I welcome him back to the White House.
But remember, the war is beyond just Afghanistan. There are over 60 Al Qaida organizations around the world. And today we struck a blow for freedom by cutting off their money—one of their money sources. And I'm absolutely convinced we can

But our Nation and this terrorist war says to me more than ever that we need to develop defenses to protect ourselves against weapons of mass destruction that might fall in the hands of terrorist nations. If Afghanistan or if the Taliban had a weapon that was able to deliver a weapon of mass destruction, we might be talking a little different tune about our progress against Al Qaida than we are today


Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India and an Exchange With Reporters
November 9, 2001

We also talked about the need to make sure humanitarian aid reaches those who hurt in Afghanistan. And we discussed a post-Taliban Afghanistan that enables the country to survive and move forward and one that represents all the interests of the people of Afghanistan

President Bush. Well, the Prime Minister and I had a very good discussion about the progress we're making on this particular part of the war against terror. He understands what I understand, that we're just only beginning to fight terrorism in Afghanistan. 
I assured him exactly what I've been assuring the American people, that I've got the patience necessary to achieve our objective in the Afghan theater, and the objective is to bring the Al Qaida to justice and to make sure that Afghanistan has got a stable form of government after we leave. I also told the Prime Minister that we're achieving our military objectives. 
This is a different kind of war. It's a war that matches high-technology weapons with people on horseback. It's a war in which the enemy thinks they can hide in caves and we'll forget about them. It is a war that's going to take a deliberate, systematic effort to achieve our objectives. And our Nation has not only got the patience to achieve that objective, we've got the determination to achieve the objective. And we will achieve it



Remarks at the Signing Ceremony for the National Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve Week Proclamation
November 9, 2001

America faces an evil and a determined enemy. They committed mass murder against innocent citizens, and they have brought misery and terror to the people of Afghanistan. They persecute women. They destroy great monuments of human culture and religious faith. They execute people who convert to other religions. They steal food that we send to help starving people. They hope to spread their terror around the world, but we're not going to let them

We're fighting a war on many fronts. It's a diplomatic war; it's a financial war. The military is performing brilliantly in Afghanistan, and we could not win the war without the help of the Guard and the reservists. And they, in turn, could not do their vital work without the support of their employers. Many employers are putting the national interests above their own self-interest, including the five recipients of the Secretary of Defense Employers Support Freedom Award. They have representatives with us today: Southwest Airlines, Boeing, EDS Electronic Data Systems, BAE Systems, and the City of Bedford, Virginia


Remarks Following Discussions With President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan and an Exchange With Reporters in New York City
November 10, 2001

We discussed ways to accelerate our progress in Afghanistan against Al Qaida and the Taliban. We also discussed our humanitarian efforts to help Afghans through the winter. And we spent time on the need to work together for long-term reconstruction of Afghanistan, once the Taliban no longer hold power

President Bush. Well, I think we share a common view that in order for there to be a country that is stable and peaceful on this good leader's western border, that any power arrangement must be shared with the different tribes within Afghanistan. And a key signal of that will be how the city of Kabul is treated. We will encourage our friends to head south, across the Shamali Plains, but not into the city of Kabul, itself. And we believe we can accomplish our military missions by that strategy. 
So it's a—the Secretary—I don't want to put words in the good Secretary's mouth, but we believe a strategy that makes sense for the long run is one that is all encompassing. And a signal of that strategy will be how the city of Kabul is treated



Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
November 10, 2001

The Taliban are now learning this lesson. That regime and the terrorists who support it are now virtually indistinguishable. Together, they promote terror abroad and impose a reign of terror on the Afghan people. Women are executed in Kabul's soccer stadium. They can be beaten for wearing socks that are too thin. Men are jailed for missing prayer meetings. 
The United States, supported by many nations, is bringing justice to the terrorists in Afghanistan. We're making progress against military targets, and that is our objective. Unlike the enemy, we seek to minimize, not maximize, the loss of innocent life. 
I'm proud of the honorable conduct of the American military. And my country grieves for all the suffering the Taliban have brought upon Afghanistan, including the terrible burden of war. The Afghan people do not deserve their present rulers. Years of Taliban misrule have brought nothing but misery and starvation. Even before this current crisis, 4 million Afghans depended on food from the United States and other nations, and millions of Afghans were refugees from Taliban oppression. 
I make this promise to all the victims of that regime: The Taliban's days of harboring terrorists and dealing in heroin and brutalizing women are drawing to a close. And when that regime is gone, the people of Afghanistan will say with the rest of the world, "Good riddance." 
I can promise, too, that America will join the world in helping the people of Afghanistan rebuild their country. Many nations, including mine, are sending food and medicine to help Afghans through the winter. America has airdropped over 1.3 million packages of rations into Afghanistan. Just this week, we airlifted 20,000 blankets and over 200 tons of provisions into the region. We continue to provide humanitarian aid, even while the Taliban try to steal the food we send. 
More help eventually will be needed. The United States will work closely with the United Nations and development banks to reconstruct Afghanistan after hostilities there have ceased and the Taliban are no longer in control. And the United States will work with the U.N. to support a post-Taliban Government that represents all of the Afghan people



Remarks at a Veterans Day Prayer Breakfast in New York City
November 11, 2001

And this is true in Afghanistan today. And this has always been true of the men and women who have served our Nation. This Nation is freedom's home and freedom's defender. And we owe so much— so much—to the men and women, our veterans, who step forward to protect those freedoms


The President's News Conference With President Vladimir Putin of Russia
November 13, 2001

Both nations arecommitted to the reconstruction of Afghanistan, once hostilities there have ceased and the Taliban are no longer in control. We support the U.N.'s efforts to fashion a post-Taliban government that is broadly based and multiethnic. The new government must export neither terror nor drugs, and it must respect fundamental human rights.

President Bush. First of all, we're making great progress in our objective, and that is to tighten the net and eventually bring Al Qaida to justice, and at the same time, deal with the Government that has been harboring them. 
President Putin and I spent a lot of time talking about the Northern Alliance and their relationship to Kabul, as well as Mazar-e Sharif and other cities that have now been liberated from the Taliban. I made it very clear to him that we would continue to work with the Northern Alliance to make sure they recognized that in order for there to be a stable Afghanistan, which is one of our objectives, after the Taliban leaves, that the country be a good neighbor, that they must recognize that a future government must include a representative from all of Afghanistan. 
We listened very carefully to the comments coming out of the Northern Alliance today. And they made it very clear they had no intention of occupying Kabul. That's what they said. I have seen reports, which you refer to, and I also saw a report that said, on their way out of town, the Taliban was wreaking havoc on the citizenry of Kabul. And if that be the case—I haven't had it verified one way or the other, but I wouldn't be the least bit surprised. After all, the Taliban has been wreaking havoc on the entire country for over a decade. This has been on of the most repressive regimes in the history of mankind. But we will continue to work with our Northern Alliance—with the Northern Alliance commanders to make sure they respect the human rights of the people that they are liberating. 
I also saw reports—and I think President Putin mentioned this today as well—that in some of the northern cities, there was great joyous—a wonderful, joyous occasion as the citizens were free, free from repression, free from a dictatorial government. But we are both mindful, particularly mindful of the need for us to work with our Northern Alliance friends to treat people with respect
President Bush. There is no preferential place at the bargaining table. All people will be treated the same. That's what we're working with our friends the Russians on. That's the concept we're working on with the U.N. And that's only fair. That's been the vision all along. That's been the vision we talked about in Shanghai. It's the vision we have shared again today. 
Secondly, I repeat, the Northern Alliance, with whom President Putin has got some influence and I've got some influence, has told us both they have no intention of occupying—and they've said this publicly—they intend not to occupy Kabul, which is fine. That's the way it ought to be. And we will continue to work with their commanders. We've got troops there with their commanders, and we will continue to urge restraint. 
Again, I think before we jump to conclusions, we want to make sure we understand what the facts are, because the evacuating army has been one that has held this country—has terrorized this country for a long period of time. But any—regardless of that, any—any—army, advancing or retreating, needs to treat people with respect. And we will continue to work that they do so


Remarks on Arrival in Waco, Texas, and an Exchange With Reporters
November 13, 2001

The President. Well, we're working. I know one of them is from this area. 
The President. Yes. And we have made it clear to the Taliban that we expect them to be treated humanely. I hope they listen to our request. We're obviously very concerned about their safety. Our military is very aware that they're in that part of the world, and we are doing everything we can—gathering—to make sure they stay out of harm's way. It's up to the Taliban, however, to protect them. We expect them to do so


Remarks on the Rescue of Humanitarian Aid Workers Imprisoned in Afghanistan and an Exchange With Reporters in Crawford
November 14, 2001

The President. Good evening. Today we've got incredibly good news. Our United States military rescued eight humanitarian workers who had beenin prison in Afghanistan. 
I'm really proud of our Armed Forces, and I'm also thankful for the folks in Afghanistan who helped with this rescue. There have been a lot of people praying for the eight—eight innocent folks. Particularly interesting for me, since I'm here in Crawford and the two Americans were from Waco. And I know a lot of the Waco citizens have been in deep prayer that they be rescued, and their prayers were answered. 
I'm thankful they're safe. I am pleased with the way our military has conducted its operations, and I am glad to report to the American people this chapter of the Afghan theater has ended in a very positive and constructive way.
The President. Well, I think Secretary Rumsfeld will be making a statement. We're calling it a rescue. They have been helped by—I know the International Red Cross have been involved, and they were flown to safety by U.S. troops. 
The President. In Pakistan. 
The President. No, I don't think it was a mission of that—it was set up, as I understand it. In other words, there was—people on the ground were—facilitated the ability of our troops to move in and put them on a chopper and bring them to safety. 
I have been—I had spent a lot of time worrying about all eight, particularly the two young ladies. I was worried that— about the reports that perhaps the enemy would put them in a house and then, for whatever reason, would encourage that house to get bombed. I was worried for their safety. We had thought of different ways in which we could extricate them from the prison they were in. And there were some people on the ground that helped, including the International Red Cross, and our military responded. And it's great—— 
The President. I'm not sure. The good news is, they'll be home for Thanksgiving. And I would obviously—if they come back to the States or are in a position where I can call, I'd love to call them, and most of all, tell their parents that I can imagine how they feel, how thrilled they are that their daughters are safe. 
The President. I'm not sure yet, Ron [Ron Fournier, Associated Press]. I think we had—Secretary Rumsfeld is going to brief here in a second. 
The President. I think it was a—I don't think it was—I think it was, as I understand it—and again, the Secretary of Defense will be briefing, the Defense Department will be briefing—that it was a facilitated rescue. In other words, there were people—and I say "rescued" because it's a very unstable part of the world still, obviously, and you never know what the Taliban is going to do. They, first and foremost, detained these people against their will and imprisoned them. And I was deeply concerned for their safety. But the really incredibly positive news is that, thanks to help on the ground and thanks to our U.S. military, they're now safe in Pakistan
The President. It's up to the Taliban to make that decision. But we're not going to end our mission until we accomplish the mission, and the mission is Al Qaida and terrorists and terrorist training camps. 
One of the things I said in front of Congress was that one of the conditions were that these humanitarian aid workers be turned over. That part of the mission is complete. We still want Al Qaida, and we want to make sure that Afghanistan is no longer a safe haven for terrorist activity. That has yet to be accomplished. 
In the meantime, we're making substantial gains on the ground. But this is—I told the American people, this could take a while. And I'm patient, and I am steady. And our military is—and our troops on the ground are on the hunt to accomplish the objective. And we will stay there until we do accomplish the objective

Remarks With President Vladimir Putin of Russia and a Question-and-Answer Session With Crawford High School Students in Crawford
November 15, 2001

I'll tell you an interesting story, and then I'm going to let him speak about it. First of all, there's no question the Taliban is the most repressive, backward group of people we have seen on the face of the Earth in a long period of time, including and particularly how they treat women. But President Putin, I think it would be interesting for him to discuss the concept of women's rights inside of Russia and his vision of how Afghanistan treats women. But I'll tell you an interesting story. 
But anyway, I think it would be appropriate for President Putin to talk about women in Russia and his keen desire, like mine, to free the women of Afghanistan as well.
President Bush. I do. I think—and it started yesterday, in my house in Crawford, where the President and I had a very long discussion about how to make sure that the post-Taliban Afghanistan accomplish some certain objectives: one, that it be a peaceful neighbor to everybody in the region; secondly, that it never harbor and serve as a training ground for terrorism again; and third, that it be a country that doesn't export drugs. I don't know if you know this or not, but the Taliban Government and Al Qaida—the evil ones—use heroin trafficking in order to fund their murder. And one of our objectives is to make sure that Afghanistan is never used for that purpose again. 
And so we had a long discussion about a post-Taliban Afghanistan. The President understands, like I do, that any government, in order for it to achieve its objectives, must represent all the interests in Afghanistan—not only the Northern Alliance, which has been very effective fighters on the ground, but also the Pashtun tribes, which are generally in the southern part of the country. And we are working to figure out a strategy to make sure that that happens. 
There's three phases to this battle in Afghanistan: One is bringing Al Qaida to justice, and we will not stop until we do that—that's what people need to know. Secondly is to make sure that the good hearts of the American people and the Russian people, and people all over the world, are affected. By that I mean that we get the aid to the starving folks in Afghanistan. 
By the way, they were starving prior to September the 11th, because of the Taliban Government's neglect. And we're doing everything we can to make sure we get food and medicine into the regions. Part of the problem has been the Taliban. They've been stopping the shipments of food, believe it or not. It won't surprise the President, because he understands how evil they are. We're just learning how evil they are in America. 
The other problem is to make sure that the distribution lines are now open, so that we can get food not only from places like Mazar-e-Sharif, that we have now liberated, but from there into the remote regions of northern Afghanistan, in particular. It's important that we do that. And so we're working hard to make sure that we accomplish that mission. 
And the third objective is to make sure that, after we leave, that there is a stable government. As part of the way we built our coalition was to assure Russia—who has got a particular interest in this part of the world—and other countries that we weren't just going to come and achieve a military objective and disappear. We were going to come achieve a military objective, but also help this country become a reasonable partner in the world, a country that's able to foster peace and prosperity for its citizens. And that's an important part of this campaign. It's important. 
It's also important that we staythecourse and be strong, because the stronger we are as a coalition, the stronger we are in achieving our objective, it is less likely somebody else is going to try to harbor a terrorist. Our objective is not just Al Qaida and Afghanistan. Our objective is to root out terrorism wherever it may hide, wherever it may exist, so the world can be more free. And that's a common objective of the President and mine.





















