MID 406401, US v. China 
Oct 20 to Nov 19, 1995 – March 28, 1996



Remarks at the Opening Session of the Midwest Economic Conference in Columbus, Ohio
October 20, 1995

Secretary Brown—is he on this panel? Secretary Brown got back from China at 11:30 last night. The Commerce Department is a central reason for why exports have increased 4 percent, 10 percent, and 16 percent in the last 3 years. Ohio needs that. That's a good thing for you. The Middle West needs that. Michigan, a State a long way from Mexico, is like the fourth or fifth biggest exporter to Mexico. We've got a lot of people from Michigan here today. It would be a mistake for us to shut down the operations of the Commerce Department and to undermine the work they're doing in technology, especially to help people who lost their defense contracts but are looking for ways to put all these technological benefits to work in the post-cold-war world. It is not necessary to balance the budget, and it would be wrong


Exchange With Reporters in New York City Prior to Discussions With President Jiang Zemin of China
October 24, 1995

President Clinton. We'll talk about a lot of things, but we're just meeting. We haven't even had a chance to say anything yet, but we'll give you a report later. 
President Clinton. The important thing is that we're going to have this meeting. It's very important. And we'll have it. It'll be a good exchange. And then afterwards we will report about it. 
President Clinton. No. These are two great countries that have a real interest in maintaining a constructive dialog with each other and, wherever possible, a partnership


The President's News Conference
November 16, 1995
So I called Prime Minister Murayama; we had a very good talk. I have already talked to two of the other APEC leaders, President Kim of South Korea, and President Soeharto of Indonesia. I expect at least to talk to the President of China, perhaps some others before the meeting. The Vice President is going to the meeting, and then we'll have a bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Murayama. So we're determined to keep this relationship on track



Interview With NHK Television of Japan
November 17, 1995

Now, however, I think that, notwithstanding this terrible incident and the end of the cold war, we shouldn't minimize the importance of continuing this partnership. We've had 50 years of relative security in Asia because of the partnership that the United States and Japan have had for security. We still have an unresolved situation on the Korean Peninsula. North Korea has more than a million people under arms. We have an agreement, thanks to the cooperation of Japan and the United States, with China and Russia and others to dismantle North Korea's nuclear program. But it isn't finished yet. And there are many uncertainties in the future

For example, we have had military-to-military contacts with China which we are now resuming. And while we still have some concerns, and we hope the Chinese will issue a white paper on defense and be very forthright about it, the truth is that the Chinese have put most of their emphasis into growing their economy, not growing their military. So we hope that we can see further progress there. There are many issues to be resolved there, as you know, and we saw some of them in the recent flareup of tensions with Taiwan and the testing in that area. But my hope would be that by early in the next century we would see other countries coming forward to work with Japan and work with South Korea so that we can broaden the responsibilities that we all share there



Remarks at a National Democratic Club Dinner
January 9, 1996

So that first question to be asked is, why would you change an economic policy that is working? It is not perfect. We still have one enormous economic problem. As in every single instance that I am aware of in history—you can see it in China today, you could see it in the United States 100 years ago—whenever you change the whole economic structure of a country, you open up new possibilities and you make a lot of new millionaires, but you disturb the established order of things so much that a lot of people fall through the cracks


Remarks at a Democratic Luncheon in Nashville
January 12, 1996

Thank you so much, Mr. Vice President, Governor McWherter, Senator and Mrs. Gore, and Senator and Mrs. Sasser—they'll do a great job for our country in China, I know. Senator and Mrs. Mathews, and to Congressman Gordon, Congressman Clement, and Congressman Tanner, and former Congressman Jim Cooper is here with us. I'm glad to see all of you here. To the mayors who are here, my good friend Wayne Glenn, and to other people who are here from all over Tennessee and from all walks of life. And Marilyn Lloyd, I think, is here somewhere—where is she?—former Congresswoman


Remarks to the National Association of Hispanic Publications
January 26, 1996

Education has been the key to advancement of virtually everybody standing in this room tonight, and our education system in many ways is getting better and better. But it's not quite hooked up to the future as it should be. The Vice President and I are determined to see that every classroom and every library in every school in America is hooked up to the information superhighway by the year 2000. And it will help open the doors of the future for Hispanic children as never before. You're going to have children in isolated rural areas in south Texas within 4 or 5 years able to do research out of a library in Australia or China or India and learn things they never could have learned before. Because we have to bring the miracles of technology to the poor as well as the rich, to the rural as well as the urban, to all Americans. That is a vision worth achieving in our schools.


Remarks to the National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities
February 7, 1996

I told the Prime Minister of China—I mean, the President of China, when we were in our last meeting that the biggest threat to our security from China had nothing to do with what everybody reads in the paper all the time; it had to do with the fact that they might get as rich as we are, and they'd have the same percentage of their people as we do driving automobiles, and we haven't figured out how to deal with the greenhouse gases and the global warning, in which case they would present a real threat to our security because we wouldn't be able to breathe, since they have 1 billion, 200 million people and we only have 260 million. This is a very serious thing. And it needs to be a bipartisan or nonpartisan issue.


Remarks at the Louisiana Economic Development Brunch
February 9, 1996

I met with the—in the interest of Senator Johnston, I met—he cares a lot about our relationship with China—I met with the President of China in New York a few months ago, and we were talking about our differences. And I said, "You think that I'm really worried about your politics?" I said, "You know what the biggest threat to our security is that you present?" I said, "You got 1.2 billion people, and you all want your folks to be as rich as Americans, and so do I. But if you get rich in the same way we do and every one of you drives a car, you're going to burn up the atmosphere. You won't be able to breathe, and that's a threat to our common security." And he laughed, and he said, "You might be right." That's why we're working with Detroit to get a clean car, because I think it's important.


Remarks to the Community in Iowa City, Iowa
February 10, 1996

You know, I had a very interesting conversation with the President of China a few months ago. And we have some differences with China, and he said, "Sometimes I think the United States looks at us as a future threat, and you want to contain us." And I said, "No, Mr. President, I don't." But I said, "There is one threat you present to our future, but it's our fault as much as yours." And he looked at me with a sort of quizzical look in his eye, and he said, "Whatever do you mean?" I said, "Well, your economy is growing like crazy. You're buying a lot of our farm products now. We're buying a lot of your products. Everybody in China wants to get rich, like everybody in America, and I don't blame you. But you have over 1.2 billion people, and if every one of your people gets an automobile, like every one of our people has, we're not going to be able to breathe the air together. We will be choking together, in common."


Interview With the New Jersey Media in Hackensack
March 11, 1996

The President. Well, first of all, I think it is not helpful for me to say anything that would add to the tensions which already exist in that region. I believe what is going on in terms of the military exercises that China is undertaking is related to the elections in Taiwan and the fact that Chinese apparently see the elections themselves as a step in Taiwan attempting to become more or less permanently independent. I'm not sure that's right, but that's, anyway, their view of it. 
Our view is that we have had a—we have adopted a one China policy. We have strictly adhered to it. But a part of the one China policy was the clear, indeed, the explicit understanding that China and Taiwan would work out their differences peacefully over time. And we think—we still believe that's how it should be done, and we hope that's how it will be done. And in terms of getting into contingent "what if" questions, it's my belief that the tensions there right now are tough enough already. I don't think I should contribute to them
The President. I've had occasion to think about it since then. No. We're attempting to maintain constructive relationships with the Chinese, to work together when we can and to find ways to disagree in a forthright way when we have to disagree. And as I said, I don't want this to get out of hand, but neither do I—we would view any attempt to violate the understanding of the agreement that had already been reached that this would be resolved in a peaceful way very negatively. But I don't want to get into any hypotheticals



Remarks to the National Association of Attorneys General and an Exchange With Reporters
March 25, 1996

The President. Do you mean, do I think the tensions are going down? 
The President. Well, I hope they are. I was encouraged by some statements that came out of both sides in the aftermath of the election. And so I hope that is what is going on.






