MID 293101, US v USSR, 27 Feb to 29-Mar-67 to 28-Apr-67

80 - The President's News Conference
March 2, 1967

[2.] I have a brief announcement to make. I have received a reply from Chairman Kosygin to my letter of January 27.2 This reply confirmed the willingness of the Soviet Government to discuss means of limiting the arms race in offensive and defensive nuclear missiles. 
This exchange of views is expected to lead to further discussions of this subject in Moscow and with our allies. It is my hope that a means can be found to achieve constructive results
When I became President, one of the first steps I took in the first few weeks I was President was to communicate with Chairman Khrushchev and suggest that we explore together certain agreements that would be beneficial to both nations in promoting peace in the world. 
Exchanges between our two countries resulted in: the signing of the civil air agreement; the signing of the consular agreement, which I devoutly hope will be ratified by the Senate, and about which I have had innumerable conversations with the leaders of this Congress of both parties; the progress that has been made in the nonproliferation agreement--although we have not come to a complete meeting of the minds with all of the individuals involved, we have made progress; the space agreement, which we hope the Senate will act favorably upon; the East-West trade, which is being considered. 
We have recommended all of those. We hope that the Congress will confirm our judgment that they are in the best interests of the United States. They were not made as a package move. They were made as individual recommendations. 
But I do think that what your question implies is: Does that reflect a policy on the part of this Government of attempting to find areas of agreement with the Soviet Union? 
The answer is, yes. We are exploring, with every means at our command, every possible way of relieving tensions in the world and promoting peace in the world
THE PRESIDENT. My understanding of his letter is reflected in seven simple sentences. There will be a transcript available to you. I wouldn't go beyond that. 
I don't think there is any implication that is not made dear. 
THE PRESIDENT. We don't have a date on that. It will be at a mutually satisfactory time. We will be very glad for them to start at the earliest possible date. 
THE PRESIDENT. My letter was January 27, and I don't have the date of his at the moment



104 - The President's News Conference
March 9, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have reached an agreement that is satisfactory to us and in our national interest in a number of fields. I do not think that I should take your time to enumerate them. But the consular agreement is one that is now being debated. Cultural exchange is another. The space agreement is another. 
We are working very diligently, although we do not know what results will be forthcoming, in connection with the nonproliferation treaty. Discussions will soon begin in connection with offensive and defensive nuclear weapons. Ambassador Thompson will participate in those discussions in Moscow. 
We have exchanged ideas, and views, and reached agreements to the benefit of both countries and both peoples
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I believe that the Russians genuinely want peace. I think that most people in the world want peace. Some want it on different terms. 
I am hoping that the day will come when we can find some area of agreement. But I don't think that that day is here yet. We will just continue to try
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we have reached an agreement that is satisfactory to us and in our national interest in a number of fields. I do not think that I should take your time to enumerate them. But the consular agreement is one that is now being debated. Cultural exchange is another. The space agreement is another. 
We are working very diligently, although we do not know what results will be forthcoming, in connection with the nonproliferation treaty. Discussions will soon begin in connection with offensive and defensive nuclear weapons. Ambassador Thompson will participate in those discussions in Moscow. 
We have exchanged ideas, and views, and reached agreements to the benefit of both countries and both peoples



158 - Toasts of the President and President Sunay of Turkey.
April 3, 1967

In voting for aid to Greece and Turkey, I said on that day, "I do so with the hope that Russia has peaceful intentions; that she desires to live at peace with other nations; that she will cooperate in the restoration of a wartorn world; but, if it be otherwise, then I am certain as I stand here that the passage of this measure is the only course that this country can in decency take, and the only course which may avoid war." 


167 - Remarks at a Press Briefing Following a Meeting With the NATO Nuclear Planning Group.
April 7, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. No. I gave no assurances of any kind. I discussed the subjects I outlined with you. I told them we heartily concurred in this kind of thinking, this kind of planning, this kind of exchange of views, but it wasn't for me to say to them that I will give you this guarantee or this assurance. We just didn't get into that.  (Note – This statement was left out of the original version of this file, but that is ok because there are no dictionary words.)



