MID 295701, US v Panama, 6 mar to 5-Apr-76 to 6-May-76



212 - The President's News Conference
March 13, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Three Presidents have been negotiating since 1965 with the Government of Panama to resolve the dispute that arose following the very sad and tragic incident that happened at that time where some 30 people were killed, including, as I recall, approximately 10 Americans. These negotiations have gone on for about 10-plus years. I can assure you of this: The United States, as long as I am President, will do nothing to give up the control of the operations of the canal and will do nothing to give up the military protection of the canal. And that is what the experts in our Government are most concerned about. And whatever is agreed to, if anything, will be submitted openly to the United States Congress for consideration


231 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Members of the National Newspaper Association.
March 19, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. The negotiations are going on. They have been going on under Mr. Johnson, under Mr. Nixon, and under ourselves. There are some very tough issues to be decided. We have not made progress in a meaningful way. We have a very good negotiator down there, and I can't tell you when there will be any conclusion of the negotiations, because the issues are tough. But let me emphasize and reemphasize that the United States, under this administration, will not do anything to jeopardize the national security of the canal
or the operations of the canal


237 - Exchange With Reporters on Arrival at Asheville, North Carolina.
March 20, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Of course, any allegation to the effect that we are going to negotiate away the Panama Canal is just totally inaccurate. Three Presidents-President Johnson, President Nixon, and myself--have been negotiating with the Panama Government following the very serious riots that took place there in 1965, when 30 individuals were killed, including about 10 Americans. 
We are trying to negotiate it in a responsible way, but under no circumstances are we going to give away what some people allege. And until we conclude the negotiations, there is no change in the status whatsoever



282 - The President's News Conference
April 2, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the United States made an agreement a good many years ago for the utilization of a strip of land and for the construction of a canal. The United States over the years has maintained the national security of that strip of land and the operation of that canal, and we have operated the canal. 
The White House, with President Johnson first, President Nixon second, and myself third, has been negotiating with the Panamanian Government to find a way to avoid the kind of incident that took place in 1965 where 30 people were killed, including, as I recall, some 10 Americans. If we can negotiate an agreement which will protect our right to defend that canal and to maintain and operate that canal, there is a possibility that an agreement will be reached. But none has yet, and it is something that is in the negotiating process and no further.


318 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Republican Party Reception in San Antonio.
April 9, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Sir, I don't think you have to worry about that. The United States, as far as I am concerned, will never give up its defense responsibilities and capabilities. It will never give up theright of navigation and so forth. You just don't have to worry


325 - The President's News Conference
April 10, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. I think it is premature to come to any conclusion as to what might be the final resolution of the long, long-standing differences between the United States and Panama. Three Presidents have had representatives negotiating on this very controversial issue. 
I can simply say--and say it very emphatically--that the United States will never give up its defense rights to the Panama Canal and will never give up its operational rights as far as Panama is concerned. Since there is no resolution today, I don't think I should prejudge any detailed, final settlement in this conflict or controversy. I can assure everybody in the United States that we will protect defense and operational responsibilities as far as the Panama Canal is concerned



354 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session in Indianapolis at the Statewide Convention of the Indiana Broadcasters Association.
April 23, 1976

I have read my Republican opponent's comments, and if you read them as he has said them himself, the net result is this Government should break off any future negotiations, the current negotiations with Panama. I think that is wrong. What we are trying to do is to make certain that we have theright to operate, theright to maintain and to defend the Panama Canal during its usable economic lifetime--a long period of time that would extend into the next century. And I think that is in our national interest. And even after what we consider to be the useful economic lifetime of the canal, if it continues to operate, it would be operated for the total utilization of all parties. 
Number one, you would undoubtedly have a recurrence of the bloodshed that took place in 1964 and '65 when 20 Panamanians and 4 Americans were killed. I don't know whether you saw the other day the news stories or films taken during that bloodshed, those riots down there. Undoubtedly, you would have that repeated not once, but many times. 
Every Latin American country--about 25 of them are against us if we break off negotiations. That means 309 million people in South America are against us. I don't think that is theright course of action, to break off negotiations and get the alienation of 309 million people in South America. 
And number three, if we break off negotiations and riots begin, bloodshed is repeated, we will have to send at least 10-20,000 more U.S. military personnel down there to defend the canal. 
Now, all of those bad things can be avoided as President Johnson decided, as his successor decided and I decided by continuing negotiations. Now, if you break off negotiations, you have to be willing to accept the things that I have indicated--bloodshed, riots, more U.S. troops down there, and the animosity and antagonism of 309 million people in South America. 
If you continue negotiations, as President Johnson did, his successor and I am doing, you can continue to try and find an answer to avoid those things that I think are wrong. So, I am delighted to have the position I am taking, and I think my opponent's position is totally irresponsible


356 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Forum in Evansville, Indiana.
April 23, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Let me give you what we are doing and what our aim and objective is. This administration, like the administration of former President Johnson and his successor, is determined to keep the canal operating, maintained, and defended by the United States during the term of any treaty as long as that canal is economically justifiable. Now that, I think, is a responsible position to take. 
We are not underanycircumstances going to do away with the operational capability, the maintenance capability, and the defense capability during the term of a long term treaty that will last well within the next century. 
Those negotiations were started in 1964 or 1965 because there had been a riot where 20 people were killed that were Panamanians, and 4 Americans--serious bloodshed. If we break off those negotiations, as my Republican opponent wants us to do, you will have riots, more bloodshed, and also you will incur the enmity, the antagonism of every one of the 25 Latin and South American countries. They represent 309 million people in this hemisphere. And, in addition, because of the probability or certainty, I would say, of riots and bloodshed, we will have to add to our present U.S. military personnel in the Panama. We have roughly 10,000 American GI's down there now, and if we have bloodshed and threats of sabotage, we will have to send at least another 10 and probably 20,000 more Americans down there. 
We can avoid all of that by continuing the negotiations for a responsible settlement, and those who advocate breaking off negotiations are irresponsible


362 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Forum in Atlanta.
April 23, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. First, let me state categorically, the United States has not been pushed around. That is good rhetoric, but it ain't true. 
Now, let's talk about the Panama Canal because my opponent has made some very strong and very categorical statements in that regard. The only way you can interpret those statements are that the present negotiations between the Government of the United States and the Government of Panama should be ended. 
This administration and President Johnson's administration and his successor's administration and my administration believe that negotiations are the responsible action to take. And those negotiations were undertaken as a result of a serious riot that took place in Panama in 1964 where 24 people were killed---20 Panamanians and 4 Americans. It was decided at that time that we ought to sit down and talk with the Panamanian Government. For what purposes? For the purpose of trying to make sure that we have control over the operation, the maintenance, and the defense of that canal during its economic lifetime. That's what we want, and I think if we are patient and wise and strong, eventually at a proper time we can get such an agreement, which is the responsible thing to do. And any agreement would go on into the next century--it's not going to happen tomorrow or the next day, it is a 40-to-50 or maybe longer year agreement. 
Now, let's take what my opponent's arguments are. He says cut off the negotiation. What would that lead to? First, it would lead to probably a resumption of the kind of riots, the bloodshed that took place in 1964 when 24 people were killed, except probably more. It would inevitably antagonize, it inevitably would arouse the ire of 25 South American and Latin American nations that involve 309 million people. That is an awful lot of people to antagonize, and it would undoubtedly lead to more bloodshed, it undoubtedly would require for us to protect that canal instead of having 10,000 U.S. military personnel stationed in Panama in peace, as we do today. You would have to send another 10,000 or another 20,000 American GI's there to protect it. I just don't think that makes much sense, and I think it is completely and totally irresponsible to break off those negotiations


372 - Exchange With Reporters in Bossier City, Louisiana.
April 27, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. I do not intend to turn it over during the usable or economic lifetime of the canal as far as we are concerned. But, let me point out what my opponent has said. 
He had said, in effect, that we should stop the negotiating process that was initiated first by President Johnson in 1965 following the riots of 1964, where 24 people were killed, including 4 U.S. servicemen. Those negotiations have gone on with the Government of Panama since 1965. They are now in process at this time and the reason we are doing that is to find an answer so that we can maintain the operation, the maintenance, and the defense of that canal during the term of a treaty so that it will be usable by us and by other parties during its usable economic lifetime. 
Now, let me point out what my opponent's position is. He, in effect, says that we should stop negotiating. I think that is irresponsible. Let me tell you why. 
In the first place, it would mean that we would have a resumption of the riots and the bloodshed that took place in 1964. It means that we would alienate 309 million people in South America, including 25 governments in South America, who believe that we should make changes in the present setup in the Panama. It means that with more riots and more bloodshed and the likelihood that we would have sabotage and guerilla activity involving the Panama Canal, that we would have to send an additional 10,000 to 20,000 American servicemen down to the Canal Zone to defend the canal. 
Now, this can all be avoided by rational, reasonable negotiations aimed at a long-term treaty that would extend into the next century. And this is a constructive process that President Johnson initiated and I am following at the present time, and I can assure you that we will do nothing that will jeopardize the national security of the country.


378 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at Tyler Junior College, Tyler, Texas.
April 28, 1976

In 1964, riots broke out in Panama and 24 people were killed--20 Panamanians and 4 Americans--and on that occasion it was decided by the then President Lyndon Johnson that the United States should start negotiating with the Panama Government to try and resolve how we could keep the canal open for our use, as well as the use of other parties as they do today. And those negotiations have carried on under President Johnson, Mr. Nixon, and my administration, trying to find an answer. 
And the attempt we're making is to find an answer so that the United States can maintain operational control, maintenance control, and defense control during the economic lifetime of the canal over a long period of time, anywhere from 40 to 50 years; certainly, well into the next century. No decisions have been made, and this negotiating process has gone on for 12 or 13 years. 
I think it is constructive to negotiate, as my two predecessors did. Now my Republican opponent, by his very, I think, critical statements, in effect, says call off the negotiations. And let's think about the consequences of calling off those negotiations. 
You would undoubtedly have more riots, undoubtedly more bloodshed. You would incur the enmity, antagonism of 309 million people in Latin and South America, 25 nations. And if we were to keep the canal open with these riots and this guerrilla activity that would inevitably result, the United States would have to add significantly to the present military forces there. We now have roughly 10,000 Army personnel down there to defend the canal. You would have to double it or triple it. 
Now, I think those very bad consequences can be overcome by responsible negotiation, and anybody who wants to call off the negotiations by the language which has been used or the points that have been made, I think is terribly irresponsible. And I intend to continue the negotiations, and I assure you we will not do anything that will undercut, destroy the national security interests of the United States in the Panama Canal


385 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Campaign Rally in Houston.
April 28, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. First, let me correct the record. I said that a person that would cut off negotiations for the future arrangements of the Panama Canal would be acting irresponsibly, and I repeat that here tonight. 
I say it would be irresponsible to cut off the negotiations which were initiated by former President Johnson in 1965 and carried on for the last 12 or 13 years. Those negotiations are aimed at the preservation of our national interests in the Panama Canal. And we are going to negotiate. 
No decision has been made to maintain the operational capabilities, the maintenance capability, and the defense capabilities for an extended period of time into the next century during the economic lifetime of that canal. 
We are not going to give up our national interests in the preservation or the utilization of that canal, period. 
Now, when anybody says we should terminate negotiations, what does that mean? It means that we will undoubtedly have the riots and the bloodshed that took place in 1964 when 24 people, including 4 Americans, were killed. It will undoubtedly mean that we will incur the enmity, the antagonism of 309 million people in Latin and South America, including 25 nations. And it undoubtedly would mean that in order to preserve peace and to protect the canal, we would have to send an additional 10-20,000 more American GI's down to defend the canal. We can avoid all of that and protect our national interest by continuing the negotiations




387 - The President's News Conference
April 29, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. The Panama Canal is not, in the overall context, as important today as it was in the past, although it is still a very vital part of our capability to move from the east coast to the west coast. And what I am trying to do is to maintain the usability of that canal without hindrance, without bloodshed, without guerrilla warfare, and without antagonizing 309 million individuals in South and Latin America. And if we break off those negotiations, it will unquestionably lead to bloodshed, we will have guerrilla warfare, the possibility of the canal being disabled. It would be very, very possible. So, what we are trying to do is to preserve the usability of that canal ad infinitum, so to speak, so that it will not be lost to us as a part of our economic and military needs and necessities

THE PRESIDENT. The context was that the canal would be open to transit by the United States and all other parties as long as it was economically usable or viable. That was the context in which I used that phrase. 
THE PRESIDENT. Certainly. During the term of the treaty, which we would
expect would be 40 to 50 years, which again is the estimated economic viability and usability of that canal, we would have theright to operate to maintain and defend it


392 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at Baylor University in Waco, Texas.
April 29, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. First, I think we have to be factual about it. The Panama Canal is not a major source of income for the United States. As a matter of fact, the United States pays the Government of Panama $2.5 million a year for therights to have the canal go through the country of Panama. That is a factual statement. 
We don't get any revenue. As a matter of fact, it is a loss, and we pay Panama $2.5 million a year for therights that we exercise in Panama. 
Now, I am not going to give away anything that involves our national security as far as the Panama Canal is concerned. But, let me just give you the situation as we approach the negotiations. 
In 1964, there was a terrible riot in Panama and in the Canal Zone. Twenty Panamanians and four American GI's were killed. At that time, President Lyndon Johnson decided the wise thing to do was to sit down and negotiate with the Government of Panama to see if we could avoid that kind of bloodshed, if we could find a responsible solution. 
Those particular negotiations have gone on, carried out by President Johnson, by President Nixon, and by myself. And those negotiations are an attempt to find a responsible solution so that the United States of America loses nothing in the capability to traverse or transit that canal, to use it along with all other countries, and for a long, long period of time, well into the next century, probably 50 years. We would have theright to maintain, to operate, and to defend that canal, which is more or less the expected economic utilization lifetime of that canal. 
Now, my friend and my opponent in this Republican primary says--I have forgotten the word--but anyhow, in effect what he says, we should terminate negotiations that have been going on for 12 years in a responsible way. I can assure you that if those negotiations are terminated, you will have a resumption of rioting, unquestioned additional bloodshed. You will have a very serious problem maintaining the operation capability of that canal because it is easily subject to sabotage, so you will have to increase the U.S. Army contingent down there which is now 10,000 by at least another 10,000 and maybe another 20,000. And in the interim, you will have 26 Latin and South American neighbors and 309 million Latin and South Americans angry, antagonistic against the United States, all in this hemisphere. I think we ought to carry on those negotiations responsibly as we are doing. And we are going to maintain, as long as I am President, the necessary responsibility, the necessary influence to make sure that we don't give away one thing involving our national security


398 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Forum in Dallas.
April 30, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Let me assure you that this administration will under no circumstances give up any right of transit, any national security interest as far as the Panama Canal is concerned. But I want to straighten out the record concerning several things. 
The 1903 treaty with Panama is quite a different treaty from, for example, the purchase of the Louisiana Territory or the purchase of Alaska. I was asked the question down at Baylor University yesterday, the young man said, "The Panama Canal brings us great revenue." 
Well, that is completely and totally inaccurate because at the time of the first treaty, the United States agreed to pay $250,000 a year for theright to use that territory, not in a sovereign way, but theright to use that territory, 10 miles wide and 51 miles long, for the construction and operation of the canal. 
And let me say another thing, that I had to correct the record for this young man, was that that treaty has been revised a number of times, including the increase in the compensation that the United States pays Panama for the use of their land from $250,000 a year. Today we pay Panama $2,500,000 a year. 
So, that treaty that was initially signed in 1903 has been amended a number of times. But let me say that following the bloodshed of 1964, a great Texan--I didn't always agree with him, I suspect many of you didn't--decided it was in the best interest of the United States to negotiate in order to avoid bloodshed in the future, in order to avoid antagonizing 25 South American and Latin American nations, including your border neighbor Mexico, and 309 million Latin Americans and South Americans and to permit that canal to be operated in perpetuity as long as it's a viable economic method of transportation. 
He decided that negotiation was a lot smarter than having all of these other things take place. We negotiated from 1965 right until the present time, and any treaty that is signed will be of a maturity date 40, probably 50 years, which means 25 years in the next century when the size of that canal, the usability of that canal, the economic viability of that canal could be quite different from what it is today. 
It will be over 100-some years old, and the transportation capabilities for the use of that canal could be quite different from what they are today. So, what makes sense to me and makes sense to two of my predecessors, that during the term of that 50-year treaty we, the United States, have the capability and the responsibility to defend it, to operate it, and to maintain it. 
And I think that is a responsible position to take and that we are guaranteed after the end of a 50-year treaty theright for us and for all nations to use that canal. I think that is a responsible position, and as my opponent has said, he believes we ought to stop negotiations. I think that is complete and total irresponsibility because it will inevitably lead to bloodshed; it will inevitably lead to guerrilla action that will stop the use of the canal now and inevitably it will antagonize our friends and neighbors below the border. And I think a better policy is to do what we are doing--negotiating. And, it's a policy that will protect our interest. And this President will never do anything to injure, harm our overall national interest in the Panama Canal


406 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the Abilene Jaycees Bicentennial Celebration, Abilene, Texas.
April 30, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Let me start out by saying, under no circumstances will I ever do away with our right, our authority, our national defense usability of the Panama Canal. You can start with that, period. 
But let me say that in 1964, if your mind will go back to that time, we had a riot in Panama. Twenty Panamanians were killed. The National Guard and other military forces got involved, and four Americans were killed. 
At that time, a great Texan, President Lyndon Johnson, decided that we ought to negotiate rather than fight, it would be better to talk rather than to have riots. And the net result was that those negotiations started, they have continued from 1965 to the present time, and what we are seeking to do is to establish a treaty of an extended period of time, 50 years, well into the next century, and in that treaty, during the period of that treaty, we would have the authority and theright to maintain, to operate, and to defend that canal which, in effect, means for the remainder of the canal's useful economic lifetime. 
Now, let me take the alternative of what my opponent has said. He says that in effect we should stop those negotiations. Let me be very candid and say that if those negotiations were terminated, you would have a resumption of the riots and the bloodshed, you would have the antagonism of every Latin American, every South American country--25, including 309 million people in that part of the hemisphere. You would undoubtedly, because of the actual riots and bloodshed, have to send another 10,000 to 20,000 American GI's down to defend the canal if they could, because it is a place--if you have been there as I have been--which is not easily defendable. Guerrilla warfare would very easily destroy the usability of that canal. 
So, what we are trying to do, and Mr. Johnson tried to do, and Mr. Nixon tried to do, and I am trying to do, is to make certain that we get a treaty that gives us therights for as long as that canal is economically viable. And we will get that kind of canal right and it will be for at least 50 years, which is for the economical usability of that canal, period


415 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Forum in Fort Wayne.
May 2, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Let me first say that I will tell you what my views are on the negotiations concerning the Panama Canal. But I was very interested this afternoon to see my good friend--I am sure he is a good friend of yours--Senator Barry Goldwater on "Meet the Press." 
I am reading from the text of what the question was and what the answer was by Senator Goldwater. He was asked this question: "On the Panama Canal, you raised it earlier in the program, who is right on that? Whose position do you support, Ford or Reagan's?" 
Senator Goldwater: "I have to support Ford's position on it, and I think Reagan would, too, if he knew more about it." [Laughter] 
But to answer the second question, the nation of Brazil does not support the position of the United States holding, as it is the situation down there in the Panama. As a matter of fact, the Government of Brazil is standing with the Panamanian Government, and that's also the inference here in Senator Goldwater's statement where he supports me and is opposed to Governor Reagan. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, let me tell you what we are doing. In the first place, in 1964 there were very serious riots in Panama; 24 people were killed, 20 Panamanians, and 4 Americans. And following that riot, the then President of the United States, Lyndon Johnson, undertook negotiations with the Government of Panama. And those negotiations have continued under President Johnson and then under President Nixon and now under my administration. 
And what are we trying to do? We are trying to establish a long, long-term treaty of about 50 years that would guarantee to the United States theright to defend, to maintain, and to operate that canal. 
All the experts that I have talked to tell me that the economic usability of the canal is no longer than 50 years. In fact, it is getting ]ess and less valuable as a means of transportation today than it was 5 or 10 years ago. So, what we are trying to do is to make sure that during the economic lifetime of the canal, we have an absolute control over it. 
Now, let me just add one other point. The people who say we should break off negotiations have to be very realistic--that if those negotiations are broken off, you will find that those riots will come back. We will have not one but many, and you will inevitably have bloodshed. 
Number two, you will antagonize 25 nations in South America, including Brazil, and that is about 309 million people. 
And in order to adequately defend the canal if negotiations are broken off, you will find that the United States, instead of having 10,000 GI's down there to defend it, you will have to have 20,000 or 30,000, and maybe they can't defend it. 
Now, what we're trying to do--as Senator Goldwater says, where he agrees with me and he disagrees with Governor Reagan--we're trying to protect the economic and the military capability of that canal as long as it's necessary in our national security


416 - Remarks at a President Ford Committee and Friends for Ford Reception in Fort Wayne.
May 2, 1976

People get a little rash and they get a little excitable on the rhetoric that they use, and I understand that. And yet, I have to come to the conclusion that sometimes people believe it. But I have been saying theright thing on Panama. Now, let me just tell you the kind of support I got today that I think ought to convince anybody. If any of you happened to listen to Barry Goldwater on "Meet the Press," today, you might have heard Barry Goldwater say the following. He was asked a question by one of the interrogators, and here is what he said; first, the question: "On the Panama Canal, who is right on that? Whose position do you support? Ford's or Reagan's?" 
Here is what Senator Barry Goldwater said, and I quote precisely: "I have to support Ford's position on it"--the Panama Canal--"and I think Reagan would, too, if he knew more about it." [Laughter] 
Then, I might turn over to another page. Later in this program, Barry was asked another question, and he had several paragraphs, but he ends up with this: "I would like to see Governor Reagan stop this talk on it,"--again, referring to the Panama Canal--"because some day someone is going to say 'Well, now Governor, what would you do about it?'" 
So, I think Barry Goldwater is not a bad backup witness on my behalf, and I think it totally destroys the credibility of Governor Reagan with all the charges and comments that he has made about the Panama Canal. 
We are trying to do the responsible thing and we are not going to give away our national security interests in that canal, I can assure you of that


418 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1976

For example, on "Meet the Press" Sunday, Senator Barry Goldwater came out very forthrightly on my behalf as far as my policy on the Panama Canal is concerned. And this kind of assistance, I think, helps to undercut the validity and the credibility of Governor Reagan's various charges. 
And again, I would like to quote from the "Meet the Press" program on which Senator Goldwater appeared. And when he was asked this question on the Panama Canal--the question is as follows: "On the Panama Canal, who is right on that? Whose position do you support? Ford's or Reagan's?" And Senator Goldwater said the following: "I have to support Ford's position on it, and I think Reagan would, too, if he knew more about it." 


419 - Exchange With Reporters on Arrival at Birmingham, Alabama.
May 3, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. Certainly, when he talks about using military strength first in the settling of the Panama Canal, instead of my program which means negotiation first and then the utilization of whatever we have to do if negotiations fail, I think that's a rash statement. I think it's a very unacceptable one at this point. 
THE PRESIDENT. Certainly, we would do it in the constitutional way, which means that any treaty would, of course, be submitted to the Senate for ratification. And also, under the unique circumstances that involve the Panama, it would be expected that we would also submit it to the Congress as a whole


422 - Remarks at a President Ford Committee Volunteers Reception in Birmingham.
May 3, 1976

And then we have had the problem raised by our good friend, who says something about the Panama Canal. You know his words, but did any of you happen to hear Barry Goldwater yesterday on "Meet the Press"? Well, I unfortunately don't have in my possession the text of Barry Goldwater's interrogation on "Meet the Press." But he was asked this question: "Who is right, the President or ex-Governor Reagan on the Panama Canal?" Barry Goldwater said, "On this I have to agree with President Ford, and I think that the Governor would agree with him, if he knew anything about the question." 
Just so there's no misunderstanding, let me give you the exact words. Here is the question from Miss Mackin [Catherine Mackin, NBC News]: "On the Panama Canal, who is right on that? Whose position do you support, Ford's or Reagan's?" Senator Goldwater--and I quote precisely--"I have to support Ford's position on it, and I think Reagan would, too, if he knew more about it." 



423 - Remarks at a President Ford Committee Leadership and Delegate Reception in Birmingham.
May 3, 1976

But here is the transcript of Barry Goldwater's interrogation on "Meet the Press" yesterday, and there is one issue that has been raised. I think I have tried to get the record straight, to give the facts, but sometimes another person can do it better than yourselves. And now here is Barry Goldwater being asked about the Panama Canal, and here is the question: "On the Panama Canal, who is right on that? Whose position do you support, Ford's or Reagan's?" Senator Goldwater, in response: "I have to support Ford's position on it, and I think Reagan would, too, if he knew more about it.


427 - Exchange With Reporters Following Indiana, Georgia, and Alabama Primary Election Results.
May 5, 1976

THE PRESIDENT. If we have, I don't think it's a legitimate decision, because I am absolutely convinced what this Government is doing, what this Government has done for the last 13 years, is theright policy. And we are going to continue to negotiate rather than to accelerate the possibility of a military conflict. And so we're going to do what we believe is right, which I think is negotiate in the Panama



