MID 363401, US v Libya, 3 jun to 3-Jul-83 to 24-Aug-83




Remarks at the Annual Convention of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith 
June 10, 1983

It's no coincidence that the same forces which are destabilizing the Middle East-the Soviet Union, Libya, the PLO—are also working hand in glove with Cuba to destabilize Central America. And I'd like to urge you to support this Nation's efforts to help our friends in Central America


Remarks at a California Republican Party Fund-raising Dinner in Long Beach 
June 30, 1983

Forty percent of all of our foreign trade and two-thirds of our petroleum imports pass through the Panama Canal and the sea-lanes of the Caribbean, where we see construction in Cuba of a naval base from which Soviet nuclear submarines can now operate, a Soviet capacity for air reconnaissance over our eastern coast from Cuban bases, the building of an enormous war machine in Nicaragua aided by thousands of Cuban military personnel, sophisticated weapons, including Soviet-made tanks and arms from Cuba, the Soviet Union, the Eastern bloc, Libya, and the PLO to name a few





Remarks of President Reagan and President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire Following Their Meeting 
August 4, 1983

I expressed our admiration for President Mobutu's courageous action in sending troops to assist the Government of Chad in its struggle against Libyan-backed rebels. On the home front, the President has informed me of progress on his government's economic stabilization plan. Zaire is taking the difficult but necessarysteps to ensure sustained economic progress, and it's important that we and Zaire's other friends do what we can to help


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Foreign Policy Issues 
August 11, 1983

We are, at the same time now, because of the concern of all the northern African States there, or the central African States about the Libyan intervention—Qadhafi and his adventuring down there have them all concerned, and for that reason, many of the African States are providing troops. We have volunteered to some of them to aid in the transportation of those troops, but we're not in any way in line for participating militarily other than that

The President. As I've said before, it's not our primary sphere of influence; it is that of France. We remain in constant consultation with them, but I don't see any situation that would callfor military intervention by the United States there

The President. Well, as I say, I don't know what their plans are. Frankly, we had believed at first that there was going to be some aerial activity there. Now, I don't know whether they're negotiating at the same time with Libya or not. But I know that we had thought that because part of Libya's forces, and key forces in their first advance, not only have been motorized troops on the ground but have been aerial attacks. 
The President. Well, I think the whole attitude of Qadhafi and his empire-building is of concern to anyone, but the main concern is to the surrounding African States. They are all very much alarmed and disturbed because they believe that Qadhafi is intent on adventuring far beyond his own borders, and they believe that they're all under a threat

Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Legion in Seattle, Washington 
August 23, 1983

Drawing upon the nearly $10 billion worth of Soviet military equipment and munitions now in Libya, Colonel Qadhafi has been using Soviet-built fighter bombers, T55 tanks, and artillery in a blatant attempt to destroy a legitimate government. President Habre and the people of his country are truly beleaguered as they struggle to preserve their independence. It is in this context that we have joined a number of other countries in providing emergency security assistance to Chad




