MID 448301, North Korea

Videotaped Remarks to the Korea Society 2010 Annual Dinner
June 2, 2010
Most of all, we reaffirm the enduring alliance between our countries, an alliance rooted in shared sacrifice, common values, mutual interest, and mutual respect, an alliance that is stronger than ever. And, as we have seen in recent weeks, our alliance is needed more than ever.
The attack on the navy vessel Cheonan was an unprovoked act of aggression by North Korea. As I have told President Lee, I and the American people offer our deepest condolences, especially to the families of the 46 sailors who were lost.
To our friends from the Republic of Korea who join you tonight, I say this: You and President Lee have shown extraordinary patience and self-restraint. You have shown the world what true strength and confidence looks like. And you have the full support of your friend and ally, the United States of America.
In the days ahead, our Governments will continue to consult closely, and I look forward to meeting with President Lee this month in Toronto. Together, we will ensure our readiness and deter aggression. We will work with allies and partners to hold North Korea accountable, including at the United Nations Security Council, making it clear that security and respect for North Korea will never come through aggression, but only by upholding its obligations. And as I said during my visit to Seoul and Osan last fall, the commitment of the United States to the security and defense of the Republic of Korea will never waver.

The President's News Conference With President Dmitry A. Medvedev of Russia
June 24, 2010
Along with our international partners, we passed and are enforcing new U.N. sanctions against North Korea. We offered Iran the prospect of a better future, and when they refused, we joined with Russia and our partners on the Security Council to impose the toughest sanctions ever faced by the Government of Iran.

Remarks Following a Meeting With President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea in Toronto
June 26, 2010
I expressed to President Lee once again the condolences of all Americans for the tragic Cheonan incident and indicated to him that we stand foursquare behind him. He has handled this issue with great judgment and restraint. He rightly is insisting on North Korea being held to account for its actions in the United Nations Security Council. We are fully supportive of that effort. We think it is the right thing to do. There have to be consequences for such irresponsible behavior on the international stage.

The President's News Conference in Toronto
June 27, 2010
With respect to North Korea, our main focus right now is in the U.N. Security Council, making sure that there is a crystal-clear acknowledgement that North Korea engaged in belligerent behavior that is unacceptable to the international community. And the United States participated in the investigation that was conducted around the Cheonan. Our experts concluded that North Korea had carried out that attack. That was consistent with South Korea's assessment and others who were observers in the process.
I think President Lee has shown extraordinary restraint given these circumstances. And it is absolutely critical that the international community rally behind him and send a clear message to North Korea that this kind of behavior is unacceptable and that the international community will continue to step up pressure until it makes a decision to follow a path that is consistent with international norms.
And my expectation is, is that those who were here at the G-20, as they look at the evidence, will come to that same conclusion. I think it is a bad habit that we need to break to try to shy away from ugly facts with respect to North Korea's behavior in the interests of--or under the illusion that that will somehow help to maintain the peace.
The President. Let me answer the second question first. I had the conversation with President Hu. I was very blunt. This is not an issue where you've got two parties of moral equivalence who are having an argument. This is a situation in which you have a belligerent nation that engaged in provocative and deadly acts against the other. And I think it is very important that we are clear about that.
Now, I am sympathetic to the fact that North Korea is on China's border. They have a security interest in not seeing complete chaos on the Korean Peninsula or a collapse that could end up having a significant impact on them. And so I think the United States and the international community should be mindful that this is in China's backyard.
And so when they adopt a posture of restraint, I understand their thinking. But I think there's a difference between restraint and willful blindness to consistent problems. And my hope is, is that President Hu will recognize as well that this is an example of Pyongyang going over the line in ways that just have to be spoken about seriously, because otherwise, we're not going to be able to have serious negotiations with the North Koreans.
I, like, I think, every participant in the six-party talks, would love nothing more than to see these issues resolved diplomatically. So in that, China and the United States and Japan and South Korea and Russia all share a common interest. We'd like to see a denuclearized Korean Peninsula. We'd like to see a North Korea that is a responsible member of the world community, which would be good for the people of North Korea. But that's only going to happen if we're honest about what's taking place right now and if we're honest about our basic expectations of how nations behave in an international order.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Naoto Kan of Japan in Toronto
June 27, 2010
We discussed some very pressing security issues, in particular, North Korea, the sinking of the Cheonan, and the importance of both our countries standing in solidarity with South Korea and the entire international community standing with South Korea in condemning the incident and making sure that North Korea gets a clear signal that such provocations are unacceptable.

786 - Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 2010
Human rights have never gone unchallenged, not in any of our nations and not in our world. Tyranny is still with us, whether it manifests itself in the Taliban killing girls who try to go to school, a North Korean regime that enslaves its own people, or an armed group in Congo-Kinshasa that use rape as a weapon of war.
There is no soil where this notion cannot take root, just as every democracy reflects the uniqueness of a nation. Later this fall, I will travel to Asia. And I will visit India, which peacefully threw off colonialism and established a thriving democracy of over a billion people. I'll continue to Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim-majority country, which binds together thousands of islands through the glue of representative government and civil society. I'll join the G-20 meeting on the Korean Peninsula, which provides the world's clearest contrast between a society that is dynamic and open and free and one that is imprisoned and closed. And I will conclude my trip in Japan, an ancient culture that found peace and extraordinary development through democracy.

885 - Remarks at a Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Reception in Boston, Massachusetts
October 16, 2010
The same is true, by the way, on foreign policy. You know, over the last 20 months, we've successfully removed 100,000 of our troops out of Iraq, as I promised and committed to doing. We're going to have a series of tough decisions to make on Afghanistan. We're going to have a series of tough decisions to make on how to sustain momentum in dealing with Iran. We've got a START Treaty that is coming up that would not only reduce nuclear weapons for both the United States and Russia but underpins an entire effort that we've made over the last 20 months to strengthen the nonproliferation treaty so that we can go after Iran and North Korea from a place of moral stature.

969 - Remarks at a Veterans Day Ceremony in Seoul, South Korea
November 11, 2010
At the time, many Americans had probably never heard of Korea. It had only been 5 years since we had finished fighting the last war. But we knew that if we allowed the unprovoked invasion of a free nation, then all free nations would be threatened. And so for the first time since its creation, the United Nations voted to use armed forces to repel the attack from North Korea.
Now, it's also a reminder of what still lies on the other side of the 38th parallel. Today, the Korean Peninsula provides the world's clearest contrast between a society that is open and a society that is closed, between a nation that is dynamic and growing and a government that would rather starve its people than change. It's a contrast that's so stark, you can see it from space, as the brilliant lights of Seoul give way to the utter darkness of the North. 
This is not an accident of history. This is a direct result of the path that's been taken by North Korea, a path of confrontation and provocation, one that includes the pursuit of nuclear weapons and the attack on the Cheonan last March. 
And in the wake of this aggression, Pyongyang should not be mistaken: The United States will never waver in ourcommitment to the security of the Republic of Korea. We will not waver. 
The alliance between our two nations has never been stronger, and along with the rest of the world, we've made it clear that the North Korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons will only lead to more isolation and less security for them. 
There is another path available to North Korea. If they choose to fulfill their international obligations and commitments to the international community, they will have the chance to offer their people lives of growing opportunity instead of crushing poverty, a future of greater security and greater respect, a future that includes the prosperity and opportunity available to citizens on this end of the Korean Peninsula. 
Until that day comes, the world can take comfort in knowing that the men and women of the United States Armed Forces are standing watch on freedom's frontier. In doing so, you carry on the legacy of service and sacrifice that we saw from those who landed here all those years ago. It's a legacy we honor and cherish on this Veterans Day. 

970 - The President's News Conference With President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea in Seoul, South Korea
November 11, 2010
To advance our shared security, President Lee and I also discussed our ongoing efforts to strengthen and modernize our alliance, including our joint vision for meeting 21st-century challenges. And although I said it at Yongsan, we can never say it enough: The United States will never waver in ourcommitment to the security of the Republic of Korea. 
I reaffirmed our conviction that in the aftermath of the sinking of the Cheonan, North Korea must address South Korea's concerns and end its belligerent behavior. Likewise, North Korea needs to fulfill its obligations to eliminate its nuclear weapons program. Only by meeting its responsibilities and not threatening others will North Korea find real security and respect. 
And I want to reiterate that along with our South Korean and international partners, the United States is prepared to provide economic assistance to North Korea and help it integrate into the international community, provided that North Korea meets its obligations. 
President Obama. The six-party talks provided a valuable forum to engage North Korea and encourage it to move towards more responsible behavior. And in 2005, we began to see some positive movement, but then there was backsliding. And since that time what we've seen is talk for the sake of talking, instead of talk for the sake of actually implementing changes that would resolve the tensions on the peninsula. 
President Lee and I have been moving in complete agreement over the last couple of years in sending a message to the North Koreans that they have a choice available to them. They can continue on a path of belligerence towards their neighbors, an unwillingness to denuclearize, engaging in provocative acts, and that will ensure their continued isolation from the world community. It will prevent them from developing, it will result in hardship for their people, and it will continue to create tensions in the region. 
The preferred choice is for North Korea to say, we are going to meet our previous commitments; we are going to engage in a irreversible path towards denuclearization. And as I said in my opening statement, if they are willing to take those steps, then you will see a South Korea, a United States, and an international community that can give them substantial assistance to help develop their country and improve their security over the long term. 
Now, President Lee and I have discussed this extensively and our belief is, is that there will be a appropriate time and place to reenter into six-party talks. But we have to see a seriousness of purpose by the North Koreans in order to spend the extraordinary time and energy that's involved in these talks. We're not interested in just going through the motions with the same result. And I think the North Koreans understand that. 
So our expectation is, is that we will continue to engage. We will continue to look for signals from the North Koreans that they're serious. At the point where it appears that they are in fact prepared to move forward on the kind of path that all of us want to see, then we're going to be there ready to negotiate with them. 

Interview With The First Lady and Barbara Walters on ABC's "A Barbara Walters Special: A Thanksgiving Visit with President and Mrs. Obama"
November 23, 2010
THE PRESIDENT: Well as you said, this is a...just one more provocative incident in a series that we have seen over the last several months. ...We have strongly condemned the attack, as you mentioned. And we are rallying the international community once again to put pressure on North Korea. ...We want to make sure that all the parties in the region recognize that this is a serious and ongoing threat that has to be dealt with. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, China is a country that has influence on North Korea -- one of the few. I have communicated before and will communicate again to China that it's important that they stand firm and make clear to North Korea that there are a set of international rules that they need to abide by. 
THE PRESIDENT: South Korea is our ally it has been since the Korean War, and we strongly affirm ourcommitment to defend South Korea as part of that alliance. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, that would be... and I am not gonna speculate on military actions on this point. I want to consult with President Lee, but as I said before, this is one of our most important alliances along with our alliance with Japan. This is the cornerstone of U.S. security in the Pacific region. 


