MID 60702, US v Syria, 24 feb to 26-Mar-57 to 19-Nov-57


56 - The President's News Conference
March 27, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, we have a long history here, Mr. Smith, of disorder, riots, raids back and forth, and different kinds of moves in the war of nerves



72 - The President's News Conference
April 17, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. At this moment his itinerary goes only as far as Ethiopia and Sudan; and I think the end of his tour will not be actually scheduled until after he has completed those trips



134 - The President's News Conference
July 17, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, you say "recently renewed tensions." There has been some outbreak of border incidents, but I think that it is not necessarily true that they are generally increased tensions. As a matter of fact, I think there is some indication that both sides were quite ready to stop these. 
Now, I do say, at the same time, answering the other part of your question, that the shipping of Soviet arms and support into these areas cannot possibly contribute to peace and the lessening of tensions. It must have the opposite effect



157 - The President's News Conference
August 21, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, there are very definite limitations on what you can do in the internal affairs of any other country. 
Now, first of all, the situation there is that we were accused of a lot of things which are obviously a smoke screen behind which people that have the leftish leanings are trying to build up their power. 
The pattern that is seemingly emerging is an old one for the Soviets, to insert or offer economic and military aid, and through doing so, to penetrate the receiving country with their agents, for these to get into power, to find stooges that will do their will, and finally, to take over this country. 
Now, in Syria, how far this pattern has gone, we don't know. Actually, there is a very strict censorship and our Embassy is not free to give us all the information that it can get. We don't know exactly what is happening. So, frankly, what we are doing is getting every piece of information we can daily. We consult with others that are interested and have knowledge and trying to keep abreast of the situation
It is not one of those instances, at present, that justify any kind of action at all under the Mid-East doctrine
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't think probably there is any restriction on the diplomatic code and I am not so sure of the details. I do know that there has been a security detachment around the Embassy for some days, and we have had difficulty in really unearthing what is going on. 
THE PRESIDENT. No; we have not been trying to get the personnel out. 
THE PRESIDENT. No; learning what is going on. It is a confused situation with censorship very rigidly applied, that is what is going on
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think this: I think that is the ultimate aim, but, of course, an ultimate aim of that kind is kept very definitely under cover, because one of the things, when you go in, you appeal to the spirit of nationalism--I am talking now about the Soviet. They appeal to the spirit of nationalism in the country, telling them that through this method, you are independent, you run your own affairs, but when they get a hold of the thing, they find out too late that they are being run from somewhere else.

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I wouldn't want to speculate, because there are all sorts of degrees. For example, we feel--and I think everybody else feels--that Tito is in a far different position with respect to the free world than are Communist countries that are directly controlled by communism. 
In other words, it is international communism that spells the greatest danger to the United States, not that we approve of communism anywhere, but international communism and subordination to the views of Moscow are one thing. Independent communism is something else. And also there are all degrees of its application. 
I would say that the situation as it develops will be one that will have to be closely watched by all the free world, not merely the United States, all the free world, and we must not get into a position that would be intolerable for us. That is all




207 - The President's News Conference
October 3, 1957

Now, as to the Syrian situation itself, it seems to be solidifying to some extent. The original alarm of countries like Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq and, to some extent, Saudi Arabia, seems to have been quieted by what they have learned. 
Just exactly what grounds they have for that, I don't know, but I just can say this: we have tried our best to be friends with every nation in that area and, of course, we do know that the Arabs blame most of their troubles on the Israeli threat, as they call it. 
We, nevertheless, have tried constantly to be neutral as between that quarrel, trying to make ourselves friends of both sides so we could be useful in promoting peaceful conditions there. And the only thing I can say further, we continue to watch it, study it, confer with our friends all the time as to its probable outcome
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will tell you, I think that I had better not speculate on that. I think we had better wait a couple of weeks for further developments. 
I do say this: we do watch it with concern. I agree with the one part or one statement made by the Arab in his speech of yesterday: these affairs that are internal should be handled locally and internally. We can make our concern felt; we can try to win people to us by showing the dangers of the situation, by mutual help all the way around, in both the military primarily, but secondarily in the economic field; but we cannot afford to view such a situation developing with anything less than real concern. We have to watch it.







