China versus US
June 24 to July 24, 1994 – October 31, 1994



Interview With Foreign Journalists
July 1, 1994
To me that's an easy question to answer. If there is no threat to North Korea's security, if we mean them no ill, if Japan, if South Korea, if Russia, if China, if all of its neighbors wish to be partners in a more open world, and if the United States has that wish, then surely we should be able to work this problem out. That is my hope and my objective.

It is difficult, I think, to expect to have too high expectations for what has happened in the last several months because of all the political changes which have occurred within Japan. But I think we have continued to work along together. I think the important thing I would say—it's sort of like the argument I made to the gentleman from Canada. If you look at the relationship the United States and Japan—our troops are still there. Our military partnership is very strong. We worked as one to try to defuse the crisis in North Korea with regard to the North Korean nuclear program. I did everything I could to make sure that every step along the way, everything I did was coordinated closely with not just South Korea but also with Japan. Because of that and because—to get to the next question—our continuing strengthening relationship with Russia. We had good relationships with Russia during this period. We were able to reach out to the Chinese. But it worked because of the historic ties we have had



Interview With Tomasz Lis of Polish Television
July 1, 1994

The President. We identified, as you know, Mexico, Brazil, India, China, Hong Kong, Taiwan—that cluster—Poland, Argentina, a number of other countries, Turkey, Indonesia—that's not quite all, but that's close—countries that we see as having a very bright future, having a substantial population, a diversified, strong economy, and the ability to grow into major trading powers. And what that means is that over the next several years the United States, focusing on our Department of Commerce and our other agencies involved in trade and development, will make extraordinary efforts to promote American investment, to promote American trade, the selling of our products abroad, and to promote more purchases by Americans of products coming out of those countries.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of Japan in Naples, Italy
July 8, 1994

This is an important day. The third round of high-level talks is now beginning in Geneva. During those talks, North Korea has agreed to freeze verifiably the reprocessing and refueling elements of its nuclear program. Throughout this process, we have worked very closely with Japan and the Republic of Korea as well as with Russia and China.
However, North Korea is a member of the NPT and has made commitments to a nonnuclear Peninsula, and because of its membership there and because of its commitments, we still care very much about what's happened since 1989. And what we hoped to do is to resolve these questions in these talks. And we think we can safely proceed with these talks with absolutely no downside to our allies in South Korea, to our friends in Japan, to the Chinese, to the Russians, to any others in the neighborhood, and to ourselves, as long as North Korea maintains its commitment to freeze the important elements of its nuclear program, the reprocessing and the refueling. And so we are proceeding ahead on both fronts, as I think it should



The President's News Conference in Naples
July 9, 1994

But let me try to just quickly distill the significance of that. That's the commitment to what we're going to discuss in Halifax about the institutions. All of you from home at least have heard me say a dozen times that at the end of World War I, America made the wrong choice. After the war, we became isolated. We withdrew. Other countries withdrew. The Depression came. We wound up with World War II. At the end of World War II, we made the right choice. We got together; we created all these institutions. At the end of the cold war, everybody has made the right choice in general. I mean, you can see that in what we've done with NAFTA, with China, with you name it, trying to reach out and work together



Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medals of Freedom
August 8, 1994
James Grant is the remarkable executive director of the United Nations Children's Fund, UNICEF, where he has tirelessly waged a global crusade on behalf of the world's children. Like his father before him, he was born and raised in China, where he took up his family's tradition of offering assistance abroad and first went to work for the United Nations at the end of World War II. In the fall of 1992 he helped to broker a brief cease-fire during the siege of Sarajevo and personally directed the safe passage of a convoy carrying winter supplies of clothing, blankets, and food. As the international community's guardian of innocent children in troubled regions, he oversees the delivery of humanitarian assistance that without him might otherwise never reach those in need.
Remarks at a Victory Dinner for Senator Charles S. Robb in Vienna, Virginia

October 3, 1994
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a special day for me and for Hillary and for our family and close friends. It was 3 years ago today that I announced my candidacy for President. I was trying today, in the midst of meeting with the Vice Premier of China and the Foreign Minister of Israel and the Crown Prince of Jordan and dealing with a lot of our domestic issues, I was trying hard to remember exactly how I felt on October 3, 1991, in front of the Old State House in Little Rock. I know one thing: My mama was the only person there who thought I had a chance to win. And I don't think she was so sure. [Laughter] The incumbent President was at over 70 percent approval in all the polls, and most people though it was a fool's errand. But I thought that the race was worth making, no matter what the outcome, because at least I would never have to explain to my child why I didn't do my part to sound the alarm about what I thought was going on in America. 
Remarks at a Rally for Democratic Candidates in Framingham

Interview With Ellen Ratner
October 12, 1994
We had President Mandela. We had President Yeltsin. We had Gerry Adams. We had the Arab boycott lifted by Saudi Arabia and the other GCC countries. We had the Chinese Foreign Minister here, and we made some real breakthroughs there on getting their agreement not to sell missiles. We made a new trade agreement with Japan that I think is better than anything we've done with them in a very long time. It's been a very exciting 10 days

October 20, 1994
I want to say one thing a lot of you may not know. This is serious. I want to thank Ed Markey because last spring he called my attention to the fact that we had one million military assault-style weapons coming into this country from China. And he said we ought to stop it, and we did. And I thank him for that. And I also want to thank him for paving the way for the information superhighway in Framingham and all along Route 128, the birthplace of high technology and the future of the information superhighway. Thank you, Ed
Remarks at a Dinner for Gubernatorial Candidate Kathleen Brown in San Francisco, California

The President's News Conference
October 21, 1994
The President. I wouldn't say that, but what is happening now with regard to Haiti and Korea and Iraq in the sense that Iraq is an example of our increased mobility as a result of commitments we made in the defense budgets, what happened with the Chinese commitment to comply with the missile control regime and not to sell dangerous missiles to its neighbors, a lot of these things are the accumulation of 2 years of hard work, trying to fashion the national security of the United States and advance the economic interests of the United States and advance democracy in the post-coldwar world. And it is all—a lot of these things have come together in a short time. But we have been working on them for quite a long time now, and it's just, I think, to some extent, a simple coincidence that the benefits of these long efforts are coming to fruition now.

October 22, 1994
And let me ask you this. Is the fact that Russian missiles are not pointed at your children for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age an abnormal thing? I think that's pretty good. I think it's a good thing for America that we reached agreement with China not to export missiles that are dangerous. I think it's a good thing that we're making progress there. I think it's a good thing that we are contributing to peace in the Middle East and we helped the South Africans with their elections and we're contributing to peace in Northern Ireland. I think it's a good thing. I think it's a good thing that we did not let Saddam Hussein again become an aggressor. And a good thing—I think it's a good thing that President Aristide went home to Haiti. 
Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the Cleveland City Club

October 24, 1994
We've also changed the time when the American Government thought that it should be totally passive in helping American companies pierce foreign markets when other governments were doing everything they could to help their companies do the same. We've worked hard from Saudi Arabia to South Africa to China to open up contracts for American businesses that they can win on the merits
