MID 363601, US v Libya, 14 nov to 14-Dec-85 to 15-Apr-86

Radio Address to the Nation on Tax Reform and the Situation in Nicaragua 
December 14, 1985

Their denial of rights, their trampling of human dignity, their wrecking of an economy with suffocating socialist controls—all hurt and deeply offend us. But there's a cause for deeper concern: the specter of Nicaragua transformed into an international aggressor nation, a base for subversion and terror. Some 3,000 Cuban military personnel now lead and advise the Nicaraguan forces down to the smallest combat units. The Cubans fly the Soviet assault helicopters that gun down Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Over 7,000 Cubans, Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and other bloc and terror groups are turning Managua into a breeding ground for subversion. A delegation of Nicaraguans is now in Iran. Nicaragua's border violations against Honduras and Costa Rica continue. And Nicaragua's connection with the recent terrorist attack against Colombia's Supreme Court is now clear


The President's News Conference.
January 7, 1986
On December 27th terrorists, as we know, attacked Rome and Vietnam [Vienna] international airports. It was the latest in a series of atrocities which have shocked the conscience of the world. It's clear that the responsibility for these latest attacks lies squarely with the terrorist known as Abu Nidal and his organization. The number of his victims increased by 19, among them 5 Americans, including Natasha Simpson, an l 1-year-old girl. Many others from around the world were wounded. And we shall make every effort to bring Abu Nidal and other terrorists to justice. 
But these murderers could not carry out their crimes without the sanctuary and support provided by regimes such as Colonel Qadhafi's in Libya. Qadhafi's longstanding involvement in terrorism is well documented, and there's irrefutable evidence of his role in these attacks. The Rome and Vienna murders are only the latest in a series of brutal terrorist acts committed with Qadhafi's backing. Qadhafi and other Libyan officials have publicly admitted that the Libyan Government has abetted and supported the notorious Abu Nidal terrorist group, which was directly responsible for the Rome and Vienna attacks. Qadhafi called them heroic actions, and I call them criminal outrages by an outlaw regime. 
By providing material support to terrorist groups which attack U.S. citizens, Libya has engaged in armed aggression against the United States under established principles of international law, just as if he had used its own armed forces. We've urged repeatedly that the world community act decisively and in concert to exact from Qadhafi a high price for his support and encouragement of terrorism. The United States has already taken a series of steps to curtail most direct trade between our two countries, while encouraging our friends to do likewise. Terrorists and those who harbor them must be denied sympathy, safe haven, and support. 
In light of this latest evidence of Libya's growing role in international terrorism, it is clear that steps taken so far have not been sufficient. Tougher, more comprehensive measures are required by the international community. Accordingly, I signed today an Executive order stating that the policies and actions of the Government of Libya constitute a threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States. Congress has been notified of my decision. Under the authority vested in me by the Constitution and the laws of the United States, I've taken measures to end virtually all direct economic activities between the United States or U.S. nationals and Libya. These measures, some of which take effect immediately and others no later than February 1st, impose a total ban on direct import and export trade with Libya, except for humanitarian purposes. They prohibit commercial contracts and other transactions with Libya, including travel-related activities other than those needed for journalism or to carry out this order. I callon all Americans in Libya to leave immediately. Those who violate these orders should know that they will be subject to appropriate penalties upon their return to the United States. Let the Government of Libya understand that it is fully responsible for the welfare of those Americans still in Libya and that Libya will be held accountable for any attempt to harm them or restrict their freedom to depart. 
Our differences are not with the people of Libya, but with Colonel Qadhafi and his regime. We've taken these steps after much reflection and in full awareness of the economic consequences which the United States stands to incur as a result. Civilized nations cannot continue to tolerate in the name of material gain and self-interest the murder of innocents. Qadhafi deserves to be treated as a pariah in the world community. We callon our friends in Western Europe and elsewhere to join with us in isolating him. Americans will not understand other nations moving into Libya to take commercial advantage of our departure. We will consult with all our key allies to pursue the goal of broader cooperation. 
Italy's Prime Minister Craxi, in whose country one of the recent attacks occurred, properly emphasized the necessity not only of coping with terrorists but identifying "those states that guarantee terrorist protection and the possibility to arm and organize themselves to carry out their bloody raids." Qadhafi's Libya is such a nation, and we callupon other nations to join us in denying it the normal economic and diplomatic privileges of the civilized world. If these steps do not end Qadhafi's terrorism, I promise you that further steps will be tak
The President. Mike, the only thing I can say in answering that question—and I can't do all that you would like to do because there are things that should not be revealed-but I can assure you that we have the evidence. We have the evidence of the amount of training that has been given; that, too, he has denied. I don't think he's capable of telling the truth about these things. But we know the location of training camps for terrorists, and we also know that Abu Nidal has more or less moved his headquarters there into Libya. So, we speak with confidence. And I would like to remind you that in the first moments or days or hours following these last two, he did openly praise them as heroic undertakings. And then very shortly, along about the time that the Coral Sea was leaving Naples—and it was only leaving because its leave time there was up—but he suddenly decided that, no, he was distressed by these acts of terrorism. I think he was speaking more honestly the first time. 
The President. We are satisfied that, yes, his regime—and I don't think that his regime is doing anything without his guidance. 

The President. I'm not going to talk beyond the action that we've taken here. I am not going to make any comment as to whether we have other actions in mind or what might be done. I think that Mr. Qadhafi would be very happy if I did answer such a question, but I'm not interested in making him happy.
The President. I'm not going to comment on that or their location or anything further on it. I'm just going to assure you that we have the intelligence that led us to be able to do that. They weren't all in the United States, or I don't know how many. I haven't got the count before me right now.
The President. I don't know. We're going to consult with them. I don't know that we're going to outright ask them. We're going to tell them what we're doing. They have told us in the past that, well, the limited actions that we had taken against Libya earlier were rather ambiguous. So, now we're taking some that are a little unambiguous, and maybe that'll change some of their minds, maybe it won't. Some of them may have problems of their own, in their own economies, that's just going to render this nearly impossible. But we're going to consult and see how much cooperation we can get. 
The President. It may be frustrating, but we're going to go on with what we think has to be done.
Yes? 
The President. Well, I wish he was planning to do that himself. I'd be happy to welcome him. [Laughter] But, no, how can you not take seriously a man that has proven that he is as irrational as he is on things of this kind. I find he's not only a barbarian, but he's flaky. 
The President. Yes. This was very definitely one of our conversations, or one of our topics in our one-on-one conversations about why we had a suspicion of them. And it was incorporated in a subject that I had brought up in which I said that it was obvious that both of us suspected the other, distrusted the other, and that it was going to take more than words, but take deeds for us to eliminate that distrust. And if we could do that, then we could get on with the business of reducing arms and so forth instead of looking at each other as antagonists all the time. 
The President. Again, you're getting around to details that I don't want to get into. 
The President. Well, very obviously, they have to be a consideration. As you will recall, the first time that we took some economic actions, there were roughly 8,000 Americans in Libya. And we asked—did not order and did not declare an emergency, but asked them to come back. And now there are between a thousand and 1,500 there. But, yes, you have to consider them as potential hostages. 
The President. Oh, no, I used that in the term that we use it in conversation about someone. No, I just think that the man is a zealot. He is pursuing a revolutionary cause that could affect a great many countries. And you only have to look at his performance in Chad in which he then violated the word that he had given to France with regard to his aggression there and other places. So, I feel that you have to be on guard against virtually any kind of act.
Yes?

Interview With Independent Network Washington Bureau Chiefs 
January 8, 1986

The President. That's possible. We'll hope that, well, as many as possible would join. I think that I can understand that there are economic factors that are engaged here, that countries that have more trade, certainly, than we do with that country. On the other hand, they've got to weigh it against having to stay constantly on guard, literally military at their airports, a loss of tourist trade, the added cost of all these other things, too. And I think the case is so clear that if we could all stand together and isolate that country, that country would then have to change its ways. 
The President. No, I don't think there's any indication of that, nor would we permit him to do such a thing. But we've taken the action we've taken, and as I said last night, I won't add anything to what might be on our minds for the future. Let him wonder what's on our mind. 
The President. Well, I'm glad of the first figure, and I'm glad that we have support if it ever becomes necessary to do the other. The thing that I've always said about retaliation is that we must not get tempted into creating a terrorist act on our own in response to a terrorist act. But I am in a position of not being able to comment on what any future actions might be. 
The President. I think if it ever came to a declaration of war, they'd be aware of the difference between what I said last night. [Laughter] 
Now, one thing that I can name, just as an example, because this has been out and made public already. The men who are lying in the hospital, wounded, from Rome and the Vienna undertaking, and those that died, those terrorists that died, they were carrying passports, Tunisian passports. These passports, we happen to know, were the passports that the Libyan Government confiscated from the workers in Libya who had come across the border—as people do here in our own country—to work in Libya, but were from Tunis. And then, because of some arguments he was having with the Tunisian Government, he expelled them from his country, sent them home, and confiscated their passports. So, here turn up some terrorists, and they're carrying the passports that were taken away by the Libyan Government. 
The President. I don't see any way that they could have, no. But there are other things even more potent than that


Interview With European Journalists on Libya 
January 10, 1986

The President. Well, I don't think there's any question but that the relationship between the Soviet Union and Qadhafi's Libya has been very close. Soviet arms and weapons have been coming in there and stockpiled in there for a number of years. We're well aware of all of that. So, I don't see that there could be very much more than is already going on, and I don't think that the fear of something else or the concern about that should in any way make us unwilling to isolate Libya, as long as Qadhafi insists on backing terrorism the way he is. We cannotallow [originally can’t allow; changed for Yoshikoder] that to go unanswered in the world. 
The President. Yes, as a matter of fact, the State Department has released quite a document now. Perhaps some of you have seen it; I know it's available to everyone. Now, that document is based on unclassified information. To go further with classified information would run the risk of revealing some of our sources and so forth—the type of thing you don't want to do. But I'm sure that Mr. Whitehead will be discussing with them this and whatever else can be released at that level to them about the information that we have. And there isn't any question—a matter of fact, the unclassified document that you have makes it pretty evident that he is widely connected. We know for a fact that he's met a few times in just recent months with Nidal. 
The President. No, I was quite surprised at that. You don't join them at their level; terrorism in response to terrorism is not the answer. It is terrorism that is the evil. When I mentioned a moment ago about—there is a moral issue involved here. This is what I'm hoping that our friends and allies will consider. Can we place trade, everyday relationships, ahead in value of the immorality that is inherent in people who will come in, as they did, into an airport and just simply shoot human beings that were there—men, women, children—with no regard to what participation those people have in anything that's going on? 
The President. Well, for one thing, we were a little defenseless with regard to taking actions in response to this terrorism while so many of our citizens were there and potential hostages. So, we felt that we should untie our hands with regard to whateveraction might be necessary in the future. And, as I say, I'm hopeful that our allies might see that sanctions can be successful if enough of us do it. 
The President. Well, as I say, Mr. Whitehead is going; and to some of our immediate allies, such as in the economic group, I have asked our people to send on my behalf, personally, to the heads of state this document that I was describing a little while ago. 
The President. Oh, I think we have to take the threat seriously. As I said in the press conference the other day, through our intelligence and our cooperation with other countries in their intelligence gathering, we have been able to abort 126 terrorist missions in the last year alone. So, yes, we take those threats seriously. 
The President. Only that they have been quite open and public in declaring that we are a target. A matter of fact, he hasn't weighed his words carefully at all with regard to his feelings about us. 
The President. Well, as I say, I understood the problems of some of our allies and friends. Their trade is on a greater basis than ours. And a matter of fact, we're probably the lowest on the ladder of trade with Libya, and this due in part to the fact that we already had partial sanctions that were put in effect a few years ago. So, I'm aware of that, and I know that problem. 
Again, though, I have to point out: Is it a permanent trade that they can go on then—and we've seen the newsreels on television-the armed guards, the military forces, policemen carrying submachine guns and so forth at the airports and the various public buildings of countries such as West Germany and the others, the United Kingdom, all these other allies—can they see this as a fair trade? That in return for maintaining economic relations, that their countries must continue in this armed state with this sense of insecurity? What is going to happen to international travel? I have had any number of people that, just coming in casual contact with, have gone out of their way to tell me that they'd canceled any plans for travel, whether it is business or pleasure. Now, is this a fair exchange for retaining the trade? And remember, I don't think you should think of the sanctions as something that is forever. You think of it as something that says straighten up and fly right to Mr. Qadhafi, and then things will change. 
The President. No, as a matter of fact, you have me here; I can't discuss things of that kind. I think Mr. Qadhafi would be pleased to hear my answer, but, no, I can't answer that. I just say that I think that we should be ready for any contingency. 
The President. Oh, I think it would have to be more than words; I think by deeds alone. For example, in reading this material there, you will find he does engage in training and in financing—through accounts in many of the banks, including banks in Europe as well as the United States—terrorist movements. He would have to reveal by action that he has severed those connections and is no longer backing these terrorist groups. 
The President. Right. 
The President. Yes. 
The President. I'm trying to recall, but I do know that there have been proposals of that kind. And before anything could be done, why, he would do something else that made it rather impossible. 
The President. Well, I don't know whether any one country could. But as I say, I would think that if basically the Western World said, "The line is drawn; we're no longer going to tolerate this activity" 

The President's News Conference
February 11, 1986
The President. Well, I don't know the nature of the operations that have been conducted. They conduct them in various parts of the Mediterranean. I don't know that they're all through yet. We have conducted operations there very early on in my administration in which I was informed, because they thought I should be, that he had ordered that that was their waters-which was akin to us claiming all of the waters from the tip of Florida over to the border of Mexico and Texas—and that some of the maneuvers would entail some planes and some ships in crossing that line but not getting into what are actually their waters. And I gave the go-ahead on that. And I would again. If they didn't cross it in any way this time, it must have been because the maneuvers did not callfor it. 
The President. Well, it didn't add to his image the first time we did it. And as I say, it would be done not for any impression on him, it would be done because, simply, we believe that our squadrons who are there, the Navy, is going to have to conduct exercises and keep itself in fighting shape. 

Radio Address to the Nation on Grenada and Nicaragua 
February 22, 1986

The Communists didn't succeed in Grenada, yet a similar chain of events had been happening in Nicaragua. We hear the same old lies, while the Nicaraguan people see their freedom being stolen away. The Communists have suppressed free speech and free press. Nicaragua's Communist dictators have launched a systematic attack against the church, its priests and bishops. And government-instigated mobs mocked His Holiness John Paul II. Meanwhile, the dictatorship is being armed to the teeth with Soviet military equipment. And everyone from the Soviets, Cubans, East Germans to the PLO and Qadhafi's Libyans are turning Nicaragua into a staging area for subversion and aggression against their and our neighbors


Address to the Nation on National Security 
February 26, 1986

One cannot sit in this office reviewing intelligence on the military threat we face, making decisions from arms control to Libya to the Philippines, without having that concern for America's security weigh constantly on your mind. We know that peace is the condition under which mankind was meant to flourish. Yet peace does not exist of its own will. It depends on us, on our courage to build it and guard it and pass it on to future generations. George Washington's words may seem hard and cold today, but history has proven him right again and again. "To be prepared for war," he said, "is one of the most effective means of preserving peace." Well, to those who think strength provokes conflict, Will Rogers had his own answer. He said of the world heavyweight champion of his day: "I've never seen anyone insult Jack Dempsey


Remarks to Jewish Leaders During a White House Briefing on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 5, 1986

There's been a lot of misinformation floating around about the true character of the Sandinista regime. Perhaps it would be more accurate to call it disinformation. I sometimes wonder why people don't just listen to what these Communists themselves say; because when they're not up here in Washington lobbying Congress, they're quite open about their true intentions. For instance, take their ties to terrorist groups in the Middle East. Those ties go back more than a decade and a half. Tomas Borge, Nicaragua's Minister of Interior, was one of many Sandinista Communists to train in PLO camps in Lebanon and Syria and Libya. To quote Borge's own words: "We say to our brother Arafat that Nicaragua is his land and the PLO cause is the cause of the Sandinistas." Yasser Arafat returned the compliment saying, "The triumph of the Nicaraguans is the PLO's triumph." 
Or listen to what the Sandinista Communists say about Qadhafi, whom they call "our great friend"—Borge again: "Our friendship with Libya is eternal. Libya is a people which, in accordance with our experience, has developed solidarity without frontiers." Remember that one: "Solidarity without frontiers." Qadhafi, meanwhile, has been openly sending them millions of dollars of arms, because, he says: "The Nicaraguan Communists fight with Libya. They fight America," he put it, "on its own ground." The Sandinistas have also drawn close to the Iranians. Just last year the Iranian Prime Minister [Mir Hosein Musavi-Khamenei], who's thought to control Iran's terrorist apparatus, said to Daniel Ortega—and I quote again: "We consider your revolutionary country as our own home." 
Managua has also rolled out the welcome mat for terrorists from around the world, not just Cubans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and Iranians, but members of the Baader-Meinhof gang, the Basque ETA [Basque Fatherland and Freedom], and the Italian Red Brigade. These criminals and lunatics now camp out on the doorstep of the United States. Let's not kid ourselves; the Sandinistas are avowed, dedicated Communists. And Communists since the days of Lenin have advocated terrorism as a legitimate means to attain political ends. Incidentally, Mr. Lenin's picture is quite prominent on new issues of postage stamps in Nicaragua. If the Sandinistas are allowed to consolidate their hold on Nicaragua, we'll have a permanent staging ground for terrorism. A home away from home for Qadhafi, Arafat, and the Ayatollah—just 3 hours by air from the U.S. border. The recent terrorist attack in the Palace of Justice in Colombia in which the Sandinista Communists were implicated is just the beginning, the first rumblings of a Communist earthquake that could overrun Latin America.


Radio Address to the Nation on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 8, 1986

Above all, only Nicaragua has become a wedge of aggression that intimidates and undermines its neighbors. Nicaragua's policy to foment violence was laid out at a secret meeting back in 1979 involving all military, intelligence, and security organizations, including the defense and secret police ministries headed by key Communists Humberto Ortega and Tomas Borge. Now this dictatorship becomes more dangerous as a flood of weapons and manpower pour in from the Soviet bloc and their coldblooded allies, the PLO and Libya. One thing alone unites these enemies of democracy: hatred for America and America's values. These men did not come to Central America to spread good will; these men came to do us harm, and they mean to succeed. As Qadhafi gloated: Supporting Nicaragua means a great thing; it means fighting America near its own borders


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Regional Editors and Broadcasters on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 11, 1986

Today Radio Catolica, the voice of the Catholic Church, has been silenced; and Cardinal Obando y Bravo, primate of Nicaragua, has said: "We want to state clearly that this government is totalitarian. We are dealing with an enemy of the Church." La Prensa, the last independent newspaper, is subject to constant censorship and often violent threats. The Communists have driven the Jewish community from the country and persecuted the Miskito Indians, killing and imprisoning thousands of these gentle people. Soviet, East German, Libyan, PLO, Cuban troops and advisers swarm over the country in the thousands. Corruption in the regime has become blatant. Last October Commandante Ortega pulled up to a Manhattan optician's shop in a 17-car motorcade to spend $3,500 on designer glasses for himself, his wife, and his daughter. The Sandinistas, faced with internal unrest and disaffection, have responded to the cries of repression by the Nicaraguan people by building nine new prisons; Somoza had only one


Remarks at an Exhibit of Weapons Captured in Central America 
March 13, 1986

The regime which has built—now, I was going to say 9, but now I've been corrected, it is 10—new prisons in Nicaragua and runs drugs to poison our children is backed by an extraordinary support network of international Communists. One doesn't need to be of a particular party or even privy to secret information to see what's happening in Central America. It's clear: Nicaraguan Communists are using their country as a staging area for aggression against their neighbors, while totally subjugating their own people. Their campaign of internal repression and external aggression is being aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, Cuba, East Germany, Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam, Libya, and other radical states, movements, and organizations


Address to the Nation on the Situation in Nicaragua 
March 16, 1986

For our own security, the United States must deny the Soviet Union a beachhead in North America. But let me make one thing plain: I'm not talking about American troops. They are not needed; they have not been requested. The democratic resistance fighting in Nicaragua is only asking America for the supplies and support to save their own country from communism. The question the Congress of the United States will now answer is a simple one: Will we give the Nicaraguan democratic resistance the means to recapture their betrayed revolution, or will we turn our backs and ignore the malignancy in Managua until it spreads and becomes a mortal threat to the entire New World? Will we permit the Soviet Union to put a second Cuba, a second Libya, right on the doorstep of the United States?


Remarks by Telephone to Vice Admiral Frank B. Kelso II, Commander of the United States 6th Fleet 
March 27, 1986

During the past 5 days, the 6th Fleet has once again served as the spear and shield of American policy in a troubled and volatile region. The fundamental principle of freedom of the seas—so important to the economy and security of the free world—has been upheld in the face of a reckless and illegal Libyan attack. Your quick response and the bravery and professionalism displayed throughout this operation were an inspiration for all of us. I am particularly pleased that you did not suffer any losses. You have sent a message to the whole world that the United States has the will and, through you, the ability to defend the free world's interests. Your determination and tireless response to Libyan threats make this world a safer place


Informal Exchange With Reporters in New Orleans, Louisiana 
March 27, 1986

The President. Everyone understands now the exercise is over.



Remarks at a Senate Campaign Fundraiser for Representative W. Henson Moore in New Orleans, Louisiana 
March 27, 1986

As you know, this past week the United States—this is another subject, same philosophy-the United States 6th Fleet exercised its right of international passage in the Mediterranean. You're well aware they did it by operating with ships and aircraft, some of them in the Gulf of Sidra. They came under attack by the forces of the Libyan Government, such as it is [laughter] —and they performed superbly. And now I can tell you, as of today, the exercise is complete. And this morning, I telephoned the Commander of the 6th Fleet and told him, on behalf of all of you, of the American people, congratulations one and all for a job well done. 
Therefore, the United States will continue to defend the basic principles of law, free navigation, and international security. And I've had one rule from the very first day in office: We will never send our young service people anyplace in the world where there is danger without them understanding that if somebody shoots at them, they can shoot back. In addition, the United States will not be intimidated by new threats of terrorism against us. We're aware of intensive Libyan preparations that were already underway for terrorist operations against Americans. Mr. Qadhafi must know that we will hold him fully accountable for any such actions.


Radio Address to the Nation on International Violence and Democratic Values 
March 29, 1986

United States ships and aircraft operating in international waters in the Mediterranean were fired on by the forces of the north African nation, Libya. This was a direct military confrontation provoked by Libya's dictator, Colonel Qadhafi, who usually prefers to arm, train, and direct terrorists who gun down helpless civilians—for example, those terrorists who killed 19 civilians last December at the Rome and Vienna airports. The Libyan Government called the attacks—which left five Americans dead, including an ii-year-old girl—heroic acts. But last week Colonel Qadhafi tried his luck with some people who could actually defend themselves—United States Armed Forces, our 6th Fleet. I think it's enough to say the fleet suppressed the attacks with no loss of life. 
Eastertide for Christians and Passover for Jews are meant to be times of spiritual awareness and a deepening encounter with the Lord and with the Lord's injunction that all nations and peoples of the Earth live in peace and harmony with each other. So, perhaps a word or two is in order on the source of the violence that we've see this week. You see, dictators like those in Libya or in Nicaragua know how unpopular they are with their people. They know how shaky their rule is. They can never really feel secure. And that's why they're afraid of free elections. It's also why they need a secret police and so much armed might to intimidate those they fear most, their own people, to prevent them from even entertaining the hope that democracy will some day come to their own country. And that's why so many dictators have a special fear and hatred for the United States. American power, as long as it is used wisely and justly, is an undying symbol of hope for oppressed peoples around the world



The President's News Conference
April 9, 1986
The President. Helen, we have considerable evidence, over quite a long period of time, that Qadhafi has been quite outspoken about his participation in urging on and supporting terrorist acts—a kind of warfare, as he has called it. Right now, however, I can't answer you specifically on this other, because we're continuing with our intelligence work and gathering evidence on these most recent attacks, and we're not ready yet to speak on that. And any action that we might take would be dependent on what we learn. And so, I can't go further. 
The President. Well, we know that this mad dog of the Middle East has a goal of a world revolution, Moslem fundamentalist revolution, which is targeted on many of his own Arab compatriots. And where we figure in that, I don't know. Maybe we're just the enemy because—it's a little like climbing Mount Everest—because we're here. But there's no question but that he has singled us out more and more for attack, and we're aware of that. As I say, we're gathering evidence as fast as we can. 
The President. Well, we know that there are a number of his countrymen in this country. He has even suggested that he could callupon people to do that. And we certainly do not overlook that possibility. We're going to be on the alert and on guard for anything he might do. He has threatened repeatedly, and recently, that he will bring that kind of warfare to our shores, directly here. Of course, it's kind of hard to keep up with him, because just a short time after this recent TWA explosion, he went on the air to state that this was an attack on innocent civilians and pure terrorism, and he wouldn't have anything to do with that. That's the same man that referred to the slaughter of the innocents in Rome and Vienna airports as a noble act. So, I don't know whether you count on what he says for your real information. I think you just ignore that and go looking for facts. 
The President. When we first came here, there had been a couple of years—that area of the Mediterranean, maybe because of its width and openness, has long been the place that has been chosen by our 6th Fleet there for the practice maneuvers that it must continue to take. And those maneuvers are very often very similar because you have new recruits and new crews and so forth, and you have to keep in practice. And he then, before we were here—he drew that line and said that the waters behind that line were his. The rest of the world denied that and said those are international waters. But, for whatever reason, our Navy did not perform those maneuvers for a couple of years. And when we came here it was presented to us that if we did not just resume our normal practice, we could then give credence to his claim and just by our not ignoring that line establish the fact that it was his private preserve. And this was presented to me, and after full deliberation and consultation, I ruled that those who said this were right and that we should resume what had been a matter of practice with the 6th Fleet before. And so we did. And in 1981 we returned to having a maneuver. 
Now, it doesn't mean that you sail in with a whole fleet just to thumb your nose at him across that line. You conduct the maneuvers out in the Mediterranean—but it does mean that there are some ships on the flank, some planes, that in the exercise will cross that line. So, it isn't, as I say, a nose-to-nose confrontation that you make just to show off. And this was true in '81, but if you were to recall in '81, two planes he sent out fired upon planes of ours. And we shot down those two planes, because I had ruled that any time there is going to be a possibility of hostility against our forces, they're going to be allowed to defend themselves. Now, we did that. Now, this maneuver was the seventh such maneuver that we have had in that area. So, it wasn't an unusual thing that we set out to do. And he did open hostilities, and we closed them. 
The President. I have to tell you that there's no decision that anyone in this office has to make that is harder to make than placing these young men and women of ours in uniform in a place where their lives are endangered. It is the most difficult thing to do. But it was not a deliberate provocation, and not sitting back saying, "Oh, goody, he's going to show his hand, and we'll clobber him." Not at all. 
But even the Soviet Union recognizes those as international waters. And, again, just by usage or nonusage there of that area, what had been a normal practice for us for a number of years, would, as I say, lend credence to his claim and one day you'd just find that the world had accepted this. So, I think we've done this before in other waters and other parts of the world and other nations have also—to make sure that international waters are recognized as such. And so, there are times when—yes, when people have to be endangered, but not idly and not just for a provocation.
The President. You know, I'd never used the term "mad dog" before, but I saw one of you using it on television tonight, and I thought it sounded good. [Laughter] 
The President. This is a question that, as I say, is like talking about battle plans or something. It's not a question that I feel that I could answer, except that you all know that you've heard me on record for several years now—that if and when we could specifically identify someone responsible for one of these acts, we would respond. And so, this is what we're trying to do, is to find out who's responsible for a fine sergeant in our military dead and 50 young Americans lying in a hospital wounded because of that dastardly attack in West Berlin. And if there's identification enough to respond, then I think we respond. And I've said that over and over again. 
The President. No, no. We'll go wherever the finger points. But so far the leads have not gone in that direction on some of the more recent events.
The President. I'm not going to comment on anything that can reveal where we're getting information, or whether we're getting information in that way or not. And I'm certainly not going to say—answer anything that might endanger some possible sources for that. So, I can't answer your question

The President. Well, I could answer the other thing, that there's another side to that; that if somebody does this and gets away with it and nothing happens to them, that encourages them to try even harder and do more. And everyone is entitled to call him whatever animal they want, but I think he's more than a bad smell. 
The President. No. If he wanted to invent that as a provocation aimed at him, I've explained what that was—a practice that's been going on for several years, a number of years before I came here—long before-those maneuvers held there, and seven times since I've been here. And so, he just had to invent that to get on the air. 
The President. Not on his side, he's declared it. We just haven't recognized the declaration yet, nor will we. No, it's, as I say, we're going to defend ourselves, and we're certainly going to takeaction in the face of specific terrorist threats.


Address to the Nation on the United States Air Strike Against Libya 
April 14, 1986

At 7 o'clock this evening eastern time air and naval forces of the United States launched a series of strikes against the headquarters, terrorist facilities, and military assets that support Mu'ammar Qadhafi's subversive activities. The attacks were concentrated and carefully targeted to minimize casualties among the Libyan people with whom we have no quarrel. From initial reports, our forces have succeeded in their mission. 
Several weeks ago in New Orleans, I warned Colonel Qadhafi we would hold his regime accountable for any new terrorist attacks launched against American citizens. More recently I made it clear we would respond as soon as we determined conclusively who was responsible for such attacks. On April 5th in West Berlin a terrorist bomb exploded in a nightclub frequented by American servicemen. Sergeant Kenneth Ford and a young Turkish woman were killed and 230 others were wounded, among them some 50 American military personnel. This monstrous brutality is but the latest act in Colonel Qadhafi's reign of terror. The evidence is now conclusive that the terrorist bombing of La Belle discotheque was planned and executed under the direct orders of the Libyan regime. On March 25th, more than a week before the attack, orders were sent from Tripoli to the Libyan People's Bureau in East Berlin to conduct a terrorist attack against Americans to cause maximum and indiscriminate casualties. Libya's agents then planted the bomb. On April 4th the People's Bureau alerted Tripoli that the attack would be carried out the following morning. The next day they reported back to Tripoli on the great success of their mission. 
Our evidence is direct; it is precise; it is irrefutable. We have solid evidence about other attacks Qadhafi has planned against the United States installations and diplomats and even American tourists. Thanks to close cooperation with our friends, some of these have been prevented. With the help of French authorities, we recently aborted one such attack: a planned massacre, using grenades and small arms, of civilians waiting in line for visas at an American Embassy. 
Colonel Qadhafi is not only an enemy of the United States. His record of subversion and aggression against the neighboring States in Africa is well documented and well known. He has ordered the murder of fellow Libyans in countless countries. He has sanctioned acts of terror in Africa, Europe, and the Middle East, as well as the Western Hemisphere. Today we have done what we had to do. If necessary, we shall do it again. It gives me no pleasure to say that, and I wish it were otherwise. Before Qadhafi seized power in 1969, the people of Libya had been friends of the United States. And I'm sure that today most Libyans are ashamed and disgusted that this man has made their country a synonym for barbarism around the world. The Libyan people are a decent people caught in the grip of a tyrant. 
To our friends and allies in Europe who cooperated in today's mission, I would only say you have the permanent gratitude of the American people. Europeans who remember history understand better than most that there is no security, no safety, in the appeasement of evil. It must be the core of Western policy that there be no sanctuary for terror. And to sustain such a policy, free men and free nations must unite and work together. Sometimes it is said that by imposing sanctions against Colonel Qadhafi or by striking at his terrorist installations we only magnify the man's importance, that the proper way to deal with him is to ignore him. I do not agree. 
Long before I came into this office, Colonel Qadhafi had engaged in acts of international terror, acts that put him outside the company of civilized men. For years, however, he suffered no economic or political or military sanction; and the atrocities mounted in number, as did the innocent dead and wounded. And for us to ignore by inaction the slaughter of American civilians and American soldiers, whether in nightclubs or airline terminals, is simply not in the American tradition. When our citizens are abused or attacked anywhere in the world on the direct orders of a hostile regime, we will respond so long as I'm in this Oval Office. Self-defense is not only our right, it is our duty. It is the purpose behind the mission undertaken tonight, a mission fully consistent with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. 
We believe that this preemptive action against his terrorist installations will not only diminish Colonel Qadhafi's capacity to export terror, it will provide him with incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior. I have no illusion that tonight's action will ring down the curtain on Qadhafi's reign of terror. But this mission, violent though it was, can bring closer a safer and more secure world for decent men and women. We will persevere. This afternoon we consulted with the leaders of Congress regarding what we were about to do and why. Tonight I salute the skill and professionalism of the men and women of our Armed Forces who carried out this mission. It's an honor to be your Commander in Chief. 
We Americans are slow to anger. We always seek peaceful avenues before resorting to the use of force—and we did. We tried quiet diplomacy, public condemnation, economic sanctions, and demonstrations of military force. None succeeded. Despite our repeated warnings, Qadhafi continued his reckless policy of intimidation, his relentless pursuit of terror. He counted on America to be passive. He counted wrong. I warned that there should be no place on Earth where terrorists can rest and train and practice their deadly skills. I meant it. I said that we would act with others, if possible, and alone if necessary to ensure that terrorists have no sanctuary anywhere. Tonight, we have.


Remarks at a White House Meeting With Members of the American Business Conference 
April 15, 1986

Before discussing the topic at hand, let me talk to you briefly about the events that took place last night. Yesterday, as you know, pilots of the air and naval forces of the United States spoke to the outlaw Libyan regime in the only language that Colonel Qadhafi seems to understand. They performed courageously. Two of our airmen are missing. But let us be clear: Yesterday the United States won but a single engagement in the long battle against terrorism. We will not end that struggle until the free and decent people of this planet unite to eradicate the scourge of terror from the modern world. 
Terrorism is the preferred weapon of weak and evil men. And as Edmund Burke reminded us: In order for evil to succeed, it's only necessary that good men do nothing. Yesterday we demonstrated once again that doing nothing is not America's policy; it's not America's way. America's policy has been and remains to use only force as a last result—or resort, I should say. We would prefer not to have to repeat the events of last night. What is required is for Libya to end its pursuit of terror for political goals. The choice is theirs. 
Yet let us not underestimate the reach of Qadhafi's terror. He's tried to subvert half a dozen countries on his own continent of Africa and has had Libyan students and dissidents murdered in faraway capitals. And I would remind the House voting this week that this archterrorist has sent $400 million and an arsenal of weapons and advisers into Nicaragua to bring his war home to the United States. He has bragged that he is helping the Nicaraguans because they fight America on its own ground. We do not underestimate the brutality of this evil man, but Colonel Qadhafi ought not to underestimate either the capacity or legitimate anger of a free people



