MID 336102, US v China, 28 dec 1961 to 27-Jan-62 to 26-Feb-62



3 - Remarks in Columbus at a Birthday Dinner for Governor DiSalle.
January 6, 1962

We face a difficult and hazardous future, but one which I believe is bright with opportunity. All of the predictions which the Communists made with such assurance years ago, very few of them have come to fruition. They prophesied that the Western World would break asunder, and yet the Western World sees the greatest impetus towards unity of the Atlantic Community that it has had in its history. They prophesied that the Communist world would be a great bloc, and yet in the last 18 months to 2 years, we have seen the beginning of the fragmentation of the Communist empire--and East Germany and Poland and Hungary are kept in it by force--and Albania and Yugoslavia and China and the others begin to move away. So those who see only hazard and do not recognize that on the other side of the coin is opportunity are wrong


7 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 11, 1962

In 1961 the peace-keeping strength of the United Nations was reinforced. And those who preferred or predicted its demise, envisioning a troika in the seat of Hammarskiold--or Red China inside the Assembly-have seen instead a new vigor, under a new Secretary General and a fully independent Secretariat. In making plans for a new forum and principles on disarmament for peace-keeping in outer space--for a decade of development effort--the UN fulfilled its Charter's lofty aim



50 - The President's News Conference
February 14, 1962

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I would think there would have to be an agreement that would cover the world, if it is going to be valuable

THE PRESIDENT. Well it's obviously very difficult, but there is really no use in having an inspection system agreed upon between, say, the Soviet Union and the United States and some other countries and then have another country--large--carrying on intensive armaments preparation. Quite obviously, that would not protect our security. So this problem of bringing them in is a problem that must be considered before we would be able to have confidence in any disarmament agreement. 
I quite recognize the hazards and the difficulties of attempting to bring them in. But if we are making progress--and we have a good deal of hurdles to overcome before we come to this particular question--it is a question which waits for us before the end of the road is reached. And it would be a very difficult one, but one that we certainly should have in mind as we start on this conference
The Communist forces move forward. The government forces reinforce their people at the town. The town is very close to the Chinese border, so it's a very dangerous situation, because if the cease-fire should break down, we would have--be faced with the most serious decision. So I'm hopeful the cease-fire will continue to prevail, and that the various groups within the country will come to an agreement which will permit a neutral and independent Laos which has been the objective of our policy




59 - The President's News Conference
February 21, 1962

I think the Attorney General attempted to communicate that, but of course, he is one voice. But he is attempting to--as you know, it's better to light a candle than curse the darkness. But I do agree with you that this is one of the most serious, and I think in many ways stimulating, problems we face-how to tell our story in a way that makes it new and exciting to young students and also have them examine objectively under the light of present circumstances the serious failures of the Marxist system, which can be told from the Wall to China. And I think that is our job, and I think the trip's been worthwhile for that purpose alone







