MID 61101, US v China, 	7 may to 6-Jun-64 to 31-Dec-71


420 - The President's News Conference
June 23, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We feel that the information and our attitude has gotten through to them. We don't know what their reaction down the road will be, but we have made pretty clear, I think, our policy and our attitude. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think that I would say that we believe, as I just stated, that they are aware of our attitude and that they have no doubt about our policy or our position


475 - The President's News Conference
July 24, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I think I have already done that. I pointed out that we had already had one conference, and that we would carry out the agreements reached at that conference table, that there would be no need of our presence there, but until there is demonstrated upon the part of those who are ignoring the agreements reached at the conference table, some desire to carry out their agreement, we expect to continue our efforts in Viet-Nam


504 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 8, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I would not care to go even so far as Mr. McNamara in speculating on what other people are going to do. That involves a great many imponderables, and I don't see any useful purpose being gained by speculation



533 - Remarks at the Convocation of the National War College and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces.
August 21, 1964

Military and diplomatic policies and performances are being influenced and are being dominated by policies and performances at the center of the political systems. This is true for free Europe and Eastern Europe. This is true for Soviet Russia. This is true for Communist China. This is clearly and conspicuous true for the United States



596 - Remarks in El Paso at a Ceremony Marking the Settlement of the Chamizal Dispute.
September 25, 1964

In Asia the giant of India has endured a powerful assault and a painful transition. Free Japan is flourishing again, and Chinese aggression, by force and by threat, has failed to subdue its neighbors


607 - Remarks in Manchester to the Members of the New Hampshire Weekly Newspaper Editors Association.
September 28, 1964

As far as I am concerned, I want to be very cautious and careful, and use it only as a last resort, when I start dropping bombs around that are likely to involve American boys in a war in Asia with 700 million Chinese. 
So just for the moment I have not thought that we were ready for American boys to do the fighting for Asian boys. What I have been trying to do, with the situation that I found, was to get the boys in Viet-Nam to do their own fighting with our advice and with our equipment. That is the course we are following. So we are not going north and drop bombs at this stage of the game, and we are not going south and run out and leave it for the Communists to take over. 
Now we have lost 190 American lives, and to each one of those 190 families this is a major war. We lost that many in Texas on the Fourth of July in wrecks. But I often wake up in the night and think about how many I could lose if I made a misstep. 
When we retaliated in the Tonkin Gulf, we dropped bombs on their nests where they had their PT boats housed, and we dropped them within 35 miles of the Chinese border. I don't know what you would think if they started dropping them 35 miles from your border, but I think that that is something you have to take into consideration. 
So we are not going north and we are not going south; we are going to continue to try to get them to save their own freedom with their own men, with our leadership, and our officer direction, and such equipment as we can furnish them. We think that losing 190 lives in the period that we have been out there is bad. But it is not like 190,000 that we might lose the first month if we escalated that war. 
So we are trying somehow to evolve a way, as we have in some other places, where the North Vietnamese and the Chinese Communists will finally, after getting worn down, conclude that they will leave their neighbors alone. And if they do, we will come home tomorrow. 
It is not any problem to start a war. That is the easiest thing in the world. I know some folks that I think could start one mighty easy. But it is a pretty difficult problem for all of us to prevent one, and that is what we are trying to do



612 - Remarks to the Faculty and Students of Johns Hopkins University.
October 1, 1964

So, I use these illustrations to show you that it could have been easy in one wave to wipe out women and children and to drop bombs on North Viet-Nam and on China because these nests were located within 35 miles of the Chinese border. 
But government must be restrained in the pursuit as well as the use of power itself. And government must be moderate in the belief of its own infallibility



619 - The President's News Conference
October 3, 1964

I am convinced, as I said in Seattle, that the spread of nuclear weapons is one of the great dangers to peace, and as long as I am President, I shall continue to work as hard as I know how to work to seek agreements that will stop that spread. 
Unfortunately, as you know, and as the public record clearly shows, the Soviet Union so far has refused to support our proposal and, as all the world knows, the Chinese Communists have violently opposed any nuclear agreement of any kind



643 - Remarks in Louisville, Ky., at a Breakfast for Indiana and Kentucky State Party Leaders.
October 9, 1964

The Communists, with their problems between Russia and China now--if you think we have some headaches just think about their problems among themselves. So the big question you have to decide, then, is: do you want to try to hold the country together and provide a bipartisan, nonpartisan foreign policy that will face up to these problems as Americans and not as party people, or do you want to change and go off in this new direction?



662 - Remarks in New York City at the Annual Dinner of the Alfred E. Smith Memorial Foundation.
October 14, 1964

Almost all general statements about the world are wrong. They are not necessarily false; they seem to me just to be inadequate. 
It is true, for example, that communism is a deadly danger, but Russia is a different kind of danger from Yugoslavia. A small Communist Party in Africa is a different danger from the Government of Red China. These different dangers require different policies and different actions, and different replies
A second field of danger and opportunity is in our confrontation with Russia and Communist China. 
Today there is no longer one cold war; there are many. They differ in temperature, intensity, and danger. 
In Asia there is a different prospect. The final outcome will depend on the will of the Asian people. But as long as they turn to us for help, we will be there. We will not and we must notpermit the great civilizations of the East--almost half of the people of all the world--to be swallowed up in Communist conquest



673 - Remarks at a Tree-Planting Ceremony at the White House.
October 16, 1964

We hope that the many who see these trees through years to come, will know that there lived here those who loved this land. And I am delighted that you would observe with us this very special historic moment. It is more historic today than you think. We have a change of leadership in the Soviet Union and we have an announcement that the Chinese have detonated their bomb, and we have a lot of things that we are dealing with. But it's nice that we could take a moment to come here in the quietness of this garden and make plans, preparations for our posterity



675 - Statement by the President on the First Chinese Nuclear Device
October 16, 1964

THE CHINESE Communists have announced that they conducted their first nuclear test today. By our own detection system we have confirmed that a low yield test actually took place in Western China at about 3 a.m. Eastern daylight time. 
As Secretary Rusk noted on September 29, we have known for some time that the Chinese Communists had a nuclear development program which was approaching the point of a first detonation of a test device. 
This explosion comes as no surprise to the United States Government. It has been fully taken into account in planning our own defense program and our own nuclear capability. Its military significance should not be overestimated. Many years and great efforts separate the testing of a first nuclear device from having a stockpile of reliable weapons with effective delivery systems. 
Still more basic is the fact that if and when the Chinese Communists develop nuclear weapons systems, the free world nuclear strength will continue, of course, to be enormously greater. 
The United States reaffirms its defense commitments in Asia. Even if Communist China should eventually develop an effective nuclear capability, that capability would have no effect upon the readiness of the United States to respond to requests from Asian nations for help in dealing with Communist Chinese aggression. The United States will also not be diverted from its efforts to help the nations of Asia to defend themselves and to advance the welfare of their people. 
The Chinese Communist nuclear weapons program is a tragedy for the Chinese people who have suffered so much under the Communist regime. Scarce economic resources which could have been used to improve the well-being of the Chinese people have been used to produce a crude nuclear device which can only increase the sense of insecurity of the Chinese people. 
Other Asian nations have wisely chosen, instead, to work for the well-being of their people through economic development and through the peaceful use of the atom. In this way, they have made a great contribution to the peace and to the security of the world. 
The Chinese Communist nuclear detonation is a reflection of policies which do not serve the cause of peace. But there is no reason to fear that it will lead to immediate dangers of war. The nations of the free world recognize its limited significance and will persevere in their determination to preserve their independence. 
We join all humanity in regretting the contamination of the atmosphere caused by the Chinese Communist test. We will continue in our own efforts to keep the atmosphere clean. We will pursue with dedication and determination our purpose of achieving concrete, practical steps on the roads that lead away from nuclear armaments and war, and toward a world of cooperation and development and peace


676 - Remarks Upon Signing Bill Amending the National Defense Education Act.
October 16, 1964

We have just confirmed the detonation by the Chinese of a nuclear bomb. It is a rather crude weapon, but it is the beginning of a series of steps that I anticipate will be harmful and injurious, and require great sacrifices on the part of the Chinese people


678 - Remarks Upon Arrival at the Greater Cincinnati Airport.
October 16, 1964

We received complete confirmation that the Chinese had detonated a nuclear weapon today--at 3 a.m. our time this morning. It is a crude weapon, but it means another nation can contaminate the atmosphere, and it means in due time that they no doubt will have other weapons and will probably develop the capacity to deliver them. It is really a sad day for the Chinese people, because with all their hunger and their many untilled needs, they have to take their resources and put them into nuclear weapons. 
I then went over and met with the leading educators from all over the country, and we signed one of the most comprehensive education bills in the history of this country. We talked about the great increased need of educated minds in our country, and how many people were unemployed because they had no specific training, and how in this space age, when the Soviet Union was sending three men into space, and when the Chinese nation has developed the nuclear bomb, how important it is for every child in this land to have all the education that he is capable of taking


679 - Remarks at Government Square in Cincinnati.
October 16, 1964

In the most anti-American capital of the Communist world, the Communist rulers of the Chinese mainland have come into possession of their first nuclear device. 
We cannot know the road ahead. We know there is peril, as there has been peril all of our lives. We know there are trials, as there have been trials all of our lives. 
But we must understand and we must not forget that the meaning of the future will be influenced by the choice you make on November 3d. That is the reality of our age. 
The course to be chosen in Moscow, the course to be taken in Peiping, the course to be pursued in the capitals of the free men around the world will be guided by the decisions that the Americans make on November 3, 1964, so be sure of what you do and be sure you know you are right


686 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on Recent Events in Russia, China, and Great Britain.
October 18, 1964

On Friday of last week, Communist China exploded a nuclear device on an isolated test site in Sinkiang

That same day the Chinese nuclear device was exploded at a test site near a lake called Lop Nor, in the Takla Makan desert of the remote Central Asian province of Sinkiang. The building of this test site had been known to our American intelligence for several years. In recent weeks the rapid pace of work there gave us a quite clear signal that the long and bitter efforts of this regime were leading at last to a nuclear test. 
At first, in the 1950's, Russia helped the Chinese. This assistance in the spread of nuclear weapons may now be regarded with some dismay in Moscow. We believe that this help was ended in 1960 as the quarrel among the Communists grew sharper. Soviet technicians left suddenly, with their blueprints under their arms. And the unfinished facilities were just left there standing, and the expected supplies were cut off. 
But the Red Chinese kept to their chosen purpose, even as their economic plans collapsed and the suffering of their people increased. 
Our own distinguished Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk, gave timely warning as the preparations at Lop Nor advanced. And when the test occurred, I at once told the world that this explosion will not turn Americans and other free peoples from their steady purpose. 
No American should treat this matter lightly. Until this week, only four powers had entered the dangerous world of nuclear explosions. Whatever their differences, all four are sober and serious states, with long experience as major powers in the modern world. 
Communist China has no such experience. Its nuclear pretensions are both expensive and cruel to its people. It fools no one when it offers to trade away its first small accumulation of nuclear power against the mighty arsenals of those who limit Communist Chinese ambitions. It shocks us by its readiness to pollute the atmosphere with fallout. 
But this explosion remains a fact, sad and serious. We must not, we have not, and we will not ignore it. 
I discussed the limited meaning of this event in a statement on last Friday. The world already knows 
--that we were not surprised, 
--that our defense plans take full account of this development, 
--that we reaffirm our defense commitments in Asia, 
--that it is a long, hard road from a first nuclear device to an effective weapons system, and 
--that our strength is overwhelming now and will be kept that way. 
But what I have in my mind tonight is a different part of the meaning of this explosion at Lop Nor. 
Communist China's expensive and demanding effort tempts other states to equal folly. Nuclear spread is dangerous to all mankind. 
First, we will continue to support the limited test ban treaty, which has made the air cleaner. We callon the world"especially Red China--to join the nations which have signed that treaty. 


688 - The President's News Conference
October 19, 1964

The President presented to the leadership a highly classified briefing on recent events in the Soviet Union and Communist China. 
Director McCone and Chairman Seaborg presented details on the development of the Chinese nuclear effort.1 Mr. McCone reviewed in detail the evidence which supports the conclusions the President announced in recent days. 
Secretary McNamara reported in detail on the U.S. defense plans and deployments which take full account of the Chinese effort now and for the future. He emphasized as well the enormous cost to all mankind of any nuclear holocaust, and he showed how the heavy strategic superiority of the United States deters, and will continue to deter, all possible opponents




693 - Remarks in Memorial Hall, Akron University.
October 21, 1964

Last week the Communist Chinese exploded an atomic bomb, and they added to the poisoning of the air we breathe

In Asia we face an ambitious and aggressive China, but we have the will and we have the strength to help our Asian friends resist that ambition. Sometimes our folks get a little impatient. Sometimes they rattle their rockets some, and they bluff about their bombs. But we are not about to send American boys 9 or 10,000 miles away from home to do what Asian boys ought to be doing for themselves. 
But we have a choice. We can seek a wider war. China is there on the border with 700 million men, with over 200 million in their army. And we could get tied down in a !and war in Asia very quickly if we sought to throw our weight around. Or we could retreat and pull out and say "Goodby" to the rest of the world, that we are going to live on our own shores, and we would let Asia go to other people. But we don't seem to think that either of those alternatives is the wise decision. 
We are going to continue to try to make these people more effective and more efficient, and do our best to resolve that situation where the aggressors will leave their neighbors alone, and they will finally learn to live together in peace as they have in other parts of the world. 
So we are going to assist them against attack as we have. We will work to help them achieve progress and self-confidence. We will notpermit the independent nations of the East to be swallowed up by Communist conquest



703 - Remarks Before Two Groups at the Fifth Regiment Armory in Baltimore.
October 24, 1964

We know from tragic experience what can happen when the enemies of freedom deceive themselves about America's strength. How do we know that? 
The Kaiser listened to some voices in America and deceived himself and sunk the Lusitania because he didn't think we would fight or were prepared to fight, and he brought on World War I. 
Hitler deceived himself and listened to some voices here at home that were reckless, and he brought on World War II, because he didn't think we could get ready or we were ready or we would do anything about it. 
Red China deceived itself and brought on an expanded war in Korea. 
This is pretty important business to you people that are furnishing the boys that must die in these wars. These lessons of history must not be lost.



733 - Remarks at City Hall in Los Angeles.
October 28, 1964

Now, more than ever before in history, now in the nuclear age, now with the world-shaking changes, now that the Communists have the bomb, that is another nation that has it. We just can't afford to take reckless or needless chances. Somebody said the other day after the Chinese got the bomb that it would really be bad if both of them got it at the same time



735 - Remarks at a Rally in San Bernardino.
October 28, 1964

There are great and there are troubling changes that are going on in the world today. In the space of 24 hours, Mr. Khrushchev has toppled in the Soviet Union. In a space of 24 hours, 700 million Chinese, more than 3 1/2 times our population, have exploded a new nuclear bomb, and the government in Great Britain has a sudden change and only has a majority of four. When such changes come upon the world, then that is the time for the United States to be prudent, to be stable, to be sound, to be sure, and to act. But before we act we must think. We just can't guess


736 - Remarks at Lindbergh Field, San Diego.
October 28, 1964

So when we were tested in the Gulf of Tonkin, when they shot at our destroyers, we answered appropriately and promptly. We located their nests where they had these little PT boats, and we saw a city there that had a lot of women and children in it that was on the Chinese border where there are 700 million people, but we didn't see any reason that we should take that target and kill a lot of innocent people, women and children. What we wanted was where those PT boats were nesting. We wanted to get the old hen's nest

Just in these last 2 weeks the world has been stirred by two great events among the Communists, the change of leadership in the Kremlin and the explosion of a nuclear device on a Chinese desert


737 - Remarks in Salt Lake City at the Mormon Tabernacle.
October 29, 1964

Over these last 11 months, and particularly over these last 2 weeks, the world about us has had sweeping changes. 
In the dark corridors of the Kremlin, new leaders have moved to power. 
In Communist China, nuclear bombs have been unleashed. 
In England, our great ally, the people have chosen a labor government. 
In Japan, the Prime Minister has resigned and a new government is now being formed. 
In India, the great leader Nehru has passed on and Shastri has taken his place. 
In capitals of the free world, in capitals of the Communist world, and in capitals of the emerging world there has come--and continues to come--change of a magnitude and moment that are seldom known to man.
All political systems change. They are forced to by historic circumstance. And it would be dangerously foolish to believe that Soviet Russia or Communist China will soon become open societies. But it would be equally foolish to think that they will never change. Inside Russia, the Soviet Union, today a powerful force for change is already at work. Education, the bedrock of democracy, the enemy of dictatorship, is plowing its way



745 - Remarks at an Airport Rally in Detroit.
October 30, 1964

We all pray that we will never have to move that thumb toward that button again. We all pray that we will somehow, some way, learn how to live in the world with other people. But we do know that we have a new government in Russia in the last few days, and we do know that Mr. Khrushchev is no longer the leader of that country. We do know that the Chinese have developed a nuclear bomb, and that they have 700 million people to develop more of them


780 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
November 28, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I think that we will evaluate the entire situation out there with General Taylor in the coming week and take whateveraction we think is in the national interest


818 - The President's News Conference
December 28, 1964

From April to June 1956, Mr. Deming served as chief of Banking Advisory Mission to the Republic of Honduras, and from November to December 1960, served as consultant to the Central Bank, Government of the Republic of China. He was recommended by Secretary of the Treasury, Mr. Dillon, and by most of the--well, he is first on nearly everyone's list, and he is the only person that I have approached about it. I talked to him several weeks ago in Washington and he has now been cleared and he will give notice out there and be leaving shortly


46 - The President's News Conference
February 4, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I have only seen the very brief press report regarding General de Gaulle's conference, which apparently has just concluded before this meeting, and I would much prefer to await a full report on the exact statement before getting into any detailed discussion involving the General's observations. 
It is the position of this country, however, we believe, that the problems of the United Nations are traceable not to the United Nations Charter but to those countries which have violated either the spirit or the letter of the charter, because we believe that the framework for world progress and peace is in the charter. And I will be glad to respectfully review any observations the General has made and give due consideration to them
THE PRESIDENT. I think that the effort in Viet-Nam is an effort to help liberty-loving people preserve their freedom, and realizing how much we appreciated those who helped us to obtain ours, that we want to help everyone we can preserve theirs. And our purpose there is to help the people of South Viet-Nam preserve their freedom, and we are doing all we can to do that




172 - Address at Johns Hopkins University: "Peace Without Conquest."
April 7, 1965
Over this war--and all Asia--is another reality: the deepening shadow of Communist China. The rulers in Hanoi are urged on by Peking. This is a regime which has destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked India, and has been condemned by the United Nations for aggression in Korea. It is a nation which is helping the forces of violence in almost every continent. The contest in Viet-Nam is part of a wider pattern of aggressive purposes
There are those who say that all our effort there will be futile--that China's power is such that it is bound to dominate all southeast Asia. But there is no end to that argument until all of the nations of Asia are swallowed up
The ordinary men and women of North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam--of China and India--of Russia and America--are brave people. They are filled with the same proportions of hate and fear, of love and hope. Most of them want the same things for themselves and their families. Most of them do not want their sons to ever die in battle, or to see their homes, or the homes of others, destroyed

208 - The President's News Conference
April 27, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I have not studied the proposal and was not familiar with the fact that it had been made

THE PRESIDENT. We have read their statements from time to time, and the statements of other powers about what they propose 2 Item 172. to do. We are in close touch with the situation. That is all I think I would like to say on that matter.


246 - Address to Members of the Association of American Editorial Cartoonists: The Challenge of Human Need in Viet-Nam.
May 13, 1965

Communist China apparently desires the war to continue whatever the cost to their allies. Their target is not merely South Viet-Nam; it is Asia. Their objective is not the fulfillment of Vietnamese nationalism; it is to erode and to discredit America's ability to help prevent Chinese domination over all of Asia. 
In this domination they shall never succeed. 
And I am continuing and I am increasing the search for every possible path to peace



388 - The President's News Conference
July 28, 1965

But we must not let this mask the central fact that this is really war. It is guided by North Viet-Nam and it is spurred by Communist China. Its goal is to conquer the South, to defeat American power, and to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism. There are great stakes in the balance. Most of the non-Communist nations of Asia cannot, by themselves and alone, resist the growing might and the grasping ambition of Asian communism

THE PRESIDENT. I do not want to speculate on the reactions of other people. This Nation is prepared, and will always be prepared, to protect its national interest



448 - The President's News Conference
August 25, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I would agree that the whole situation there is very delicate, a matter that requires constant watching. Our Secretary of State is doing that. The President is doing it. We have recently sent to Indonesia one of our most trained and trusted diplomats.18 We are going to make every contribution that we can to try to preserve peace in that area. 
We think that what we are doing in South Viet-Nam has a very important bearing on the whole sector of that part of the world. I would not want to make any prophecies as to what the final outcome would be, other than we will be hopeful and we will be continuing in our efforts to contribute anything we can to a peaceful solution



6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 12, 1966
In recent months a number of nations have east out those who would subject them to the ambitions of mainland China. 
History is on the side of freedom and is on the side of societies shaped from the genius of each people. History does not favor a single system or belief--unless force is used to make it so. 
That is why it has been necessary for us to defend this basic principle of our policy, to defend it in Berlin, in Korea, in Cuba-and tonight in Vietnam.


86 - Remarks in New York City Upon Receiving the National Freedom Award
February 23, 1966
Fifth, some ask about the risks of a wider war, perhaps against the vast land armies of Red China. And again the answer is "no," never by any act of ours--and not if there is any reason left behind the wild words from Peking. 
We have threatened no one, and we will not. 
We seek the end of no regime, and we will not. 
Our purpose is solely to defend against aggression. To any armed attack, we will reply. We have measured the strength and the weakness of others, and we think we know our own. We observe in ourselves, and we applaud in others, a careful restraint in action. We can live with anger in word as long as it is matched by caution in deed



128 - Remarks at the Signing of the Supplemental Military Authorization Bill.
March 15, 1966
How sad it is that such great sums must be spent for the bombs and the planes and the gunpowders of war. How joyous it would be if these great resources could he put, instead, to the service of peace. We have said this and we have repeated it time and time again, and we will never tire of saying it, and I repeat it now: The people of Vietnam, North and South, have the same basic human needs. The people of Asia and the people of China have the same basic human needs


141 - The President's News Conference
March 22, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. I think the Secretary of State covered the administration's position very thoroughly Sunday. If he didn't, the Press Secretary did. If not, I would call to your attention that we have watched with interest and complete understanding the testimony of various committees, those of Mr. Zablocki in the House, and Mr. Fulbright in the Senate,4 and the testimony about that part of the world. We think that it is very good to have the opinion of these professors and experts, and Ambassadors and other people. 
As far as I am aware, it is not the position of this country that creates the problems with China. It is China's own position. We are very anxious to try to have more contact with her and more exchanges with her, but as has been explained by all of these people, she hangs up the phone. Until there is some change on China's part, I doubt that these academic discussions will do much more than satisfy people's yearning for information


158 - The President's News Conference
March 31, 1966
Secretary Rusk took them on a trip around the world. He discussed the African Continent, the Western Hemisphere, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, India, Pakistan, the Tashkent Agreement, the Soviet Union, the Chinese situation, Vietnam



228 - Remarks at a Democratic Party Dinner in Chicago.
May 17, 1966
I sent our ambassadors to more than 40 countries. I wrote letters to nearly 120 in the world asking for assistance, asking for peace. My plea was well received in all the nations of the world except the two most concerned, Red China and North Vietnam



277 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. I read Senator Mansfield's speech with a great deal of interest and pleasure. I asked Secretary Rusk to give the majority leader's observations very careful consideration. He is doing that. 
I have not discussed in detail with Senator Mansfield any information he may have about the willingness of the Chinese Foreign Minister to meet with Secretary Rusk. But I think we have made it very clear that we will be delighted to review the Senator's views, any information he has, and give careful consideration to them



311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966
A few years ago the nations of free Asia lay under the shadow of Communist China. They faced a common threat, but not in unity. They were still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations. They were ripe for aggression.
Now that picture is changing
They shifted over to heavy weapons, using imported ammunition, most of it coming from Communist China
There is nothing that we want in Communist China. There is nothing the American people want from Communist China.


325 - Remarks to the American Alumni Council: United States Asian Policy.
July 12, 1966
Communist China's policy of aggression by proxy is failing
A peaceful mainland China is central to a peaceful Asia. 
A hostile China must be discouraged from aggression. 
A misguided China must be encouraged toward understanding of the outside world and toward policies of peaceful cooperation. 
For lasting peace can never come to Asia as long as the 700 million people of mainland China are isolated by their rulers from the outside world. 
We have learned in our relations with other such states that the weakness of neighbors is a temptation, and only firmness that is backed by power can really deter power that is backed by ambition. But we have also learned that the greatest force for opening closed minds and closed societies is the free flow of ideas and people and goods. 
For many years, now, the United States has attempted in vain to persuade the Chinese Communists to agree to an exchange of newsmen as one of the first steps to increased understanding between our people. 
More recently, we have taken steps to permit American scholars, experts in medicine and public health, and other specialists to travel to Communist China. And only today we, here in the Government, cleared a passport for a leading American businessman to exchange knowledge with Chinese mainland leaders in Red China. 
All of these initiatives, except the action today, have been rejected by Communist China



338 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. It is the same as it was in my speech. I spelled it out in somewhat substantial detail in that speech. I feel that we should do everything we can to increase our exchanges, to understand other people better, to have our scientists and our businessmen, our authors and our newspaper people exchange visits and exchange viewpoints. 
I would hope that as a result of tearing down these harriers that some day all people in this world would be willing to be guided by the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that all peoples would want to cease aggression and would try to live in peace and understanding with their neighbors. 
So far as I am concerned, every day I am looking for new ways to understand the viewpoint of others. And I hope that at a not too distant date mainland China will be willing to open some of the barriers to these exchanges and be willing to perhaps come nearer to abiding by the principles laid down in the United Nations Charter



346 - Remarks in Indianapolis at a Ceremony Marking the 150th Anniversary of the State of Indiana.
July 23, 1966
Inside Communist China there is a struggle for power. There is a great debate going on today on the future of policy. It is obvious that their past policies have failed. In time, we hope and we believe that the mainland Chinese will come to terms with their neighbors and the rest of the world



397 - Remarks at a Navy League Luncheon, Manchester, New Hampshire.
August 20, 1966
And for more than 39 days, while we pleaded with 40 countries--every place we went we received favorable response except from the two countries that could do something about it, North Vietnam and Red China


398 - Remarks at Battery Park, Burlington, Vermont
August 20, 1966
Sure, we don't have all those things that we want. We must do better. We must have objectives, we must have goals. We must move forward. But when you look at our problems and those of the Soviet Union, when you look at our problems and those of Red China, when you look at our problems and those of Castro's Cuba, you have so much to be thankful for



417 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 27, 1966
The Denver speech was an elaboration, perhaps, and a freshening up of what I said in the speech I made as a young Congressman on the floor of the House on our relations with other nations when we had the Truman doctrine pending. At that time I said that we should have a domestic policy and people abroad should judge our foreign policy by what we are doing at home
I think it is very important for the Communist Chinese, the Russians, the North Vietnamese to know this--as I tried to say in my press conference the other day
THE PRESIDENT. I have always felt it essential for all of them to understand it. I feel the same way about the Chinese on the mainland and the North Vietnamese. The purpose of the Baltimore speech 16 was so they could really understand what was in our heart. 
That is a difficulty we have with the Communists when we try to get them to let newspapermen go into China. They refuse it and refuse to let us send them some of our exchange people. This even happens to the Soviet Union. They stop them in Tokyo
I think it is going to take a lot of explaining for the Russians to see what is truly in our hearts, because it is so different from what they really believe. The same thing is true of China and North Vietnam. 
We would like to see people go into Red China. We would like for some of them to come in here. I have gone into that in other areas. I tried to touch on that when I talked about our interests in the Pacific in my television speech that Mr. Fulbright 17 pointed out might have involved new commitments. It doesn't. We have no new commitments. We made that clear to him


420 - Remarks to the Delegates to the American Legion National Convention.
August 30, 1966
Make no mistake about the character of this war. Our adversaries have done us at least one great service: They have described this war for what it is--in unmistakable terms. It is meant to be the opening salvo in a series of bombardments--or, as they are called in Peking, "wars of liberation." 
And if it succeeds in South Vietnam, then, as Marshal Lin Piao says, "The people in other parts of the world will see . . . that what the Vietnamese people can do, they can do, too." 
It may be that this is only rhetoric. It may be that this is only the grandiose propaganda of one whose country has not fared so wall in other continents this year. But as the Economist of London wrote only last week, "Until and unless there is solid evidence that China does not intend to do what Lin Piao says it wants to do, or cannot do it, the only safe assumption for the Americans or anybody else to make is that the Chinese mean every word they say. That," says the Economist, "is where any sober Asia policy starts from." 
The bravery of young American patriots on the battlefield, the steadfast determination of our people at home, will--in time-bring an end to this trial of aggression.



437 - Remarks at the Fairfield County Fairgrounds, Lancaster, Ohio.
September 5, 1966
In Asia, we have a similar hope, though tonight it is clouded by war and it is clouded by bitterness. But still we look to the day when those on the mainland of China are ready to meet us half way, are ready to devote their enormous talents and their energy to improving the life of their people, when they are ready to take their place peacefully as one of the major powers of Asia and the world



445 - The President's News Conference
September 8, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. We always are glad when other nations feel that there is no reason for them to engage in a confrontation with us. 
Each day we pursue with every means available to us suggestions and ideas and make proposals that are calculated to bring about better understanding and better relations with other nations. 
We will continue to do that. We do do that. So the answer to both of your questions is "yes." 
First, we are glad to see people feel that there is no reason why they should have a confrontation with us. Second, yes, we do explore every possibility that we are aware of and encourage everything that we think has any potential



533 - Remarks at the East-West Center in Honolulu.
October 18, 1966
We think sooner or later this new perception will spread as well to the closed societies of Communist Asia. Sooner or later the pragmatic and compassionate spirit of the Chinese people will prevail over outmoded dogmatism. 
We in America look to that day with hope and with confidence. 
For our part, we shall do what we can to hasten its coming. We shall keep alive the hope for a freer flow of ideas and people between mainland China and the United States, as I have said so recently on so many other occasions. For only through such exchange can isolation be ended and suspicion give way to trust. 
We do not believe in eternal enmity. All hatred among nations must ultimately end in reconciliation. We hopefully look to the day when the policies of mainland China will offer and will permit such a reconciliation



554 - Remarks Upon Arrival at Bangkok, Thailand.
October 28, 1966
I believe that the Conference of seven nations succeeded at Manila; but that is a judgment that will best be made by history. For the Pacific waters also touch Hanoi and mainland China. One day, I believe, they will join the Pacific neighborhood--in peace, and without the suspicions and hostilities that make cooperation difficult today. 
One day they will be good neighbors. We look forward to that day. For our passion is peace. We seek no eternal hostility. We seek no dominance. We arecommitted to the proposition that no nation shall dominate another nation in the Pacific



555 - The President's Toast at a State Dinner in His Honor in Chakri Throne Hall, Bangkok, Thailand.
October 28, 1966
The search for freedom led my own ancestors from their homeland in Europe, as it led yours from their ancestral home in China. The Thais were more successful. Since your first migration, nearly one thousand years ago, the people of Thailand have never been a colony of any foreign power. But we Americans are still less than 200 years away from colonial status



557 - Remarks at Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Before Signing the International Education Act.
October 29, 1966
Twenty-five hundred years ago in Athens, in Palestine, in China, and in the western part of India, men probed deeply into the nature of their being--trying to make sense out of their lives



560 - Remarks at the State Dinner in Parliament House, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
October 30, 1966
While I have been in Asia the Communist Chinese have exploded another nuclear weapon, which they state was attached to a missile. 
We can only regard the pursuit of national nuclear power by too large a part of the underdeveloped world as a tragedy. For bread is the need of millions who face starvation every day, and bombs are too often purchased at the price of bread. 
The pursuit of a national nuclear capability not only makes international arms control, including a nuclear test ban and a nonproliferation treaty, vastly more difficult; it also invites danger to China itself. For the leaders of China must realize that any nuclear capability they can develop can-and will--be deterred. We have already declared that nations which do not seek national nuclear weapons can be sure that they will have our strong support, if they need it, against any threat of nuclear blackmail. 
We hope very much that mainland China, like other developing nations, will concentrate its resources on economic development. In this way a truly modern China can emerge on the Mainland. For a peaceful China has nothing to fear from any of us. A peaceful China can expect our friendship and our cooperation. A reckless China can expect vigilance and strength. 
All of Asia will gain when the day comes to pass that China is at peace with her neighbors and free from the fears and the suspicions that tonight keep her isolated from the rest of the world



607 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
November 11, 1966

I found that in almost every case the leaders of the governments felt that the spectacle of the confusion that exists in Peking now and in Red China was reducing China's influence and it gave a better opportunity for a quieter attitude. 
As the President has said, and I found it confirmed everywhere, every country in the world, with the exception of Red China and Hanoi, wants to see peace. That consensus, the pressure of world opinion, I think, gives us a right to have some encouragement



610 - The President's News Conference
November 13, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. None other than what you have seen



654 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
December 31, 1966
THE PRESIDENT. It is our hope that all the nations of the world could reach some agreement in the field of nonproliferation. In recent weeks I have felt encouraged about the discussions that have taken place. I wish that it were possible to say to the American people and to the world that all the nations of the world could reach agreement in this field. 
As yet we have not been able to bring that about. And even when we bring it about, we do not know that all nations will agree. We are working to that end. We think it is a desirable objective. We will hope for the best



3 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 10, 1967
We shall continue to hope for a reconciliation between the people of Mainland China and the world community--including working together in all the tasks of arms control, security, and progress on which the fate of the Chinese people, like their fellow men elsewhere, depends. 
We would be the first to welcome a China which decided to respect her neighbors' rights. We would be the first to applaud her were she to apply her great energies and intelligence to improving the welfare of her people. And we have no intention of trying to deny her legitimate needs for security and friendly relations with her neighboring countries





34 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1967
THE PRESIDENT. I think that there is little I can add to what the general public knows about the events in China. I think that we all know that they are having very serious problems. 
And I would not think that would add anything to the strength of our adversaries in that area. I think that we can see from some of the problems that we have ourselves from time to time that unity is very important in connection with our operations. 
And I do not see that the differences in China are going to contribute anything to the strength of the North Vietnamese. 
On the other hand, I do not want to hold out any hopes to you that I do not have myself. And I cannot say at this moment that the events in China are going to contribute immediately to the end of the war in Vietnam




225 - The President's News Conference
May 18, 1967
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think it would serve any purpose to speculate about that. 
THE PRESIDENT. Same answer
THE PRESIDENT. I know of nothing that would indicate any optimistic changes. Ambassador Gronouski reported to me at some length this morning--as I assume he did to you--about his work there. He is diligent and dedicated. We believe that he is doing a good job. 
I don't think that we have the answer to the kind of relations with a good many other nations that we would like to have. We constantly work on them, try to improve them. There is our bridgebuilding, East-West trade. 
We were and are hopeful that someday it might lead to an improvement of relations and that someday it might make it possible for all of us to live with understanding and peace in the same world together. It hasn't made that progress yet--either there or here. We still have a long way to go. 
The consular treaty was a close vote, as you know. There are some differences now about the ABM. There is still a good bit of feeling about the nonproliferation agreement. We have to bridge some gaps several places yet, but we are working on them


THE PRESIDENT. I believe that our objectives are the same and our determination is just as strong as it has ever been. 
I don't see any great fluctuation in activity, opinion, or judgment. I have said that it is a very difficult thing that we are going through. It tests the patience and the understanding of each of us. 
I hope that all of my countrymen and our friends in the world will recognize and realize what we are doing and why we are doing it. 
We believe it is in the best interests of freedom everywhere. We have given our views on negotiation, on peace, and on related matters many, many times. 
I know of nothing to be gained by repeating them. But I think that you can see there is hardly anyone who feds that there ought to be unilateral withdrawal. I think that fewer feel that way today than yesterday-or the period behind us.



312 - The President's News Conference
July 18, 1967
THE PRESIDENT. I don't know of any developments that have taken place that I could announce at this time
THE PRESIDENT. We have made it clear in a good many statements since I became President that we would like to see all of the nations of the world join in the community of nations and try to learn to work together and to live together in peace and harmony. 
We repeat that on every appropriate occasion. I have discussed our views in that regard with a number of leaders from other countries. I know of no change from the policy that I have had ever since I have been President



358 - The President's News Conference
August 18, 1967
THE PRESIDENT. First I would like to make it clear that these air strikes are not intended as any threat to Communist China. They do not, in fact, pose any threat to that country. We believe that Peking knows that the United States does not seek to widen the war in Vietnam. 
The evidence has been quite clear, we think, that the strikes were made against the major military staging areas and lines of communication where the enemy has been concentrating his supplies and troops. The transportation routes and bridges over which those troops have been moved against our men have been hit. 
We think that these targets are directly related to the enemy's capacity to move material into South Vietnam to kill American boys. 
The targets to us were clearly identifiable. They were carefully selected. They were all within North Vietnam. 
The strikes were made by the most highly trained pilots that we had. They employed every human and every technical precaution to insure that the ordnance fell on target. It did. 
While everyone is entitled to his opinion-a good many of them express it--the tougher the going gets, the more difficult it will be for some to stay with us and go all the way, and last it out. 
Nevertheless, we believe that if we are going to be there, it is essential to do everything we can to protect the men we have there. 
We are going to try to provide the maximum deterrent at the minimum loss



409 - Address on Vietnam Before the National Legislative Conference, San Antonio, Texas.
September 29, 1967
Vietnam is the focus of attention now ....It may happen to Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is misery, disease, ignorance....For you to renounce your position of leadership in Asia is to allow the Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia."



492 - The President's Remarks to Reporters Following His Meeting With Prime Minister Sato
November 15, 1967
THE PRESIDENT. It will last until you get the communiqu?. The answer is "yes


519 - Remarks to the Foreign Policy Conference for Business Executives.
December 4, 1967

Moreover--and most important--they were hypnotized by the menace of China. 
Out of this fear--and out of this sense of isolation--this awareness of desperate problems-grew something ominous. It was a paralysis of the will to progress. There was a hopeless feeling among all Asians that they were the victims, rather than the forgers, of their own destiny. 
Now, in the span of a few years, all of that, I am glad to say, has changed and the major agent of that change has been America's firmness in Asia



554 - "A Conversation With the President," Joint Interview for Use by Television Networks
December 19, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I think that the thing we must bear in mind, that what happens in South Vietnam is up to the people of South Vietnam, not to North Vietnam, not to China, the Soviet Union, or the United States--but the people of South Vietnam

THE PRESIDENT. Without going into your statements as to my views, I would say this: We are not sure just at this point of all that motivates the Chinese, or the Russians, or any of the other Communists who are supporting the North Vietnamese. 
I don't think I could honestly tell you just what their motivations are. We have always hoped that they would like to see this war brought to an end. That has been their indication to us. Whether that would work out in the long run, I don't know
THE PRESIDENT. I have said to them in several public statements that we hope that they can conduct themselves in such a way as will permit them to join the family of nations and that we can learn to live in harmony with each other. 
We have no desire to be enemies of any nation in the world. We believe that it is possible, over the years, for them to develop a better understanding of the world in which they live. 
We think there are some very important things taking place right in China today that will contribute to, we hope, a better understanding and a more moderate approach to their neighbors in the world. 
We have observed their failures in Africa, and in Latin America, and in Southeast Asia, where they have undertaken aggressive steps that have resulted in failure for them. And we hope they will profit by these experiences. We believe they will. 
We don't know all that we would like to know about what is going on in China. It is a rather closed society and we don't have all the information that we would like to have. But we are hopeful and we believe that over a period of time, that the opportunity exists for them to gain a better understanding of the other peoples of the world and thus be able to live more harmoniously with them




14 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 17, 1968

Turmoil continues on the mainland of China after a year of violent disruption. The radical extremism of their Government has isolated the Chinese people behind their own borders. The United States, however, remains willing to permit the travel of journalists to both our countries; to undertake cultural and educational exchanges; and to talk about the exchange of basic food crop materials


200 - Remarks at the Korean Consulate in Honolulu.
April 17, 1968

Our ties across the Pacific go back a long way--at least a century and a quarter--to the time when we became involved in China and then a little later in Japan. But it is only in the past 27 years that we have learned that the destiny of the United States is--once and for all--bound up with the fate of the peoples of Asia and the Pacific


568 - Remarks in New York City at a Luncheon of the All Americans Council of the Democratic National Committee.
October 27, 1968

a man who distorts the history of his time in office, and neglects to mention what we all remember: that Cuba in that period had been lost to communism; that in 1960 an ultimatum hung over Berlin; that in Southeast Asia, Laos was disintegrating, and the situation in Vietnam--where he had recommended intervention in 1954--growing steadily worse; that a summit conference had been canceled because of a U-2 flight; that the projected visit of our own American President to Japan had been canceled because of the fear of hostile demonstrators; that the Russian Premier was threatening to "bury us" economically, and many people feared that he might just do that; that the Congo was in flames and mortal danger was faced all through Africa where they were faced with being taken over by the Communists; and that Indonesia, the fifth largest nation in the world, with more than 100 million people, was sliding toward the same fate; that Chinese power threatened to overwhelm India and the rest of Asia


569 - Remarks Broadcast on Programs Sponsored by Citizens for Humphrey-Muskie.
October 27, 1968

man who even refuses and neglects to mention that Cuba was lost to communism back in his period of service in the fifties; that in 1960 an ultimatum hung over Berlin; that in Southeast Asia, Laos was disintegrating, and the situation in Vietnam--where he had recommended intervention in 1954, only to be vetoed by his own President--was then growing steadily worse; that a summit conference had to be canceled because of a U-2 flight; that the projected visit of our American President to Japan had been canceled because of the fear of demonstrators; that the Russian Premier was threatening to "bury us" economically, and many people feared that he might do just that; that the Congo was in mortal danger of being taken over by the Communists, and that Indonesia, the fifth largest nation in the world, was sliding toward the same fate; that Chinese power had threatened to overwhelm India and the rest of Asia


10 - The President's News Conference
January 27, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have noted, of course, some expressions of interest on the part of various Senators and others in this country with regard to the possibility of admitting Communist China to the United Nations. 
I also have taken note of the fact that several countries--including primarily Italy among the major countries--have indicated an interest in changing their policy and possibly voting to admit Communist China to the United Nations. 
The policy of this country and this administration at this time will be to continue to oppose Communist China's to the United Nations. 
There are several reasons for that. First, Communist China has not indicated any interest in becoming a member of the United Nations. 
Second, it has not indicated any intent to abide by the principles of the U.N. Charter, and to meet the principles that new members admitted to the United Nations are supposed to meet. 
Finally, Communist China continues to callfor expelling the Republic of China from the United Nations; and the Republic of China has, as I think most know, been a member of the international community and has met its responsibilities without any question over these past few years. 
Under these circumstances, I believe it would be a mistake for the United States to change its policy with regard to Communist China in admitting it to the United Nations. 
Now, there is a second immediate point that I have noted. That is the fact that there will be another meeting in Warsaw. We look forward to that meeting. We will be interested to see what the Chinese Communist representatives may have to say at that meeting, whether any changes of attitude on their part on major, substantive issues may have occurred. 
Until some changes occur on their side, however, I see no immediate prospect of any change in our policy


34 - The President's News Conference
February 6, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. First, I do not buy the assumption that the ABM system, the thin Sentinel system, as it has been described, was simply for the purpose of protecting ourselves against attack from Communist China. 
This system, as are the systems that the Soviet Union has already deployed, adds to our overall defense capability. I would further say that, as far as the threat is concerned, we do not see any change in that threat, and we are examining, therefore, all of our defense systems and all of our defense postures to see how we can best meet them consistent with our other responsibilities



98 - The President's News Conference
March 4, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Looking further down the road, we could think in terms of a better understanding with Red China. But being very realistic, in view of Red China's breaking off the rather limited Warsaw talks that were planned, I do not think that we should hold out any great optimism for any breakthroughs in that direction at this time

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News], as you know, the Soviet Union is in a very delicate and sensitive position as far as Vietnam is concerned. I do not divulge any confidences from the Soviet Ambassador in indicating that that is the case. You ladies and gentlemen have written it and you are correct, because here you have Communist China aiding North Vietnam; you also have the Soviet Union aiding Noah Vietnam--each vying for power in the Communist world. And, therefore, what the Soviet Union does in the Vietnamese conflict is a very difficult decision for them as related to that objective-the objective of leadership of the Communist world



108 - The President's News Conference
March 14, 1969

After long study of all of the options available, I have concluded that the Sentinel program previously adopted should be substantially modified. The new program that I have recommended this morning to the leaders, and that I announce today, is one that perhaps best can be described as a Safeguard program. 
It is a safeguard against any attack by the Chinese Communists that we can foresee over the next 10 years. 



129 - Remarks at the Convention of the National Association of Broadcasters.
March 25, 1969

The credibility of the American second strike is essential, diplomatically and also in the long range as far as preserving peace in the world. In addition to that, the ABM Safeguard system provides an area defense of the entire United States for any attack by the Chinese Communists within the next 10 years, or any other nuclear power which might acquire such weapons in that period. 
Now, many questions arise. First, will it work? Those for whom I have great respect, including perhaps beyond others the Deputy Secretary of Defense, Mr. [David] Packard, an expert in this field, say that it will. And some indication that it must have some meaning is that the Soviet Union has deployed 66 of this type of defense around Moscow and are now covering not only the threat from the West but also from Communist China.
As some have put it, with regard to the potential of a Chinese threat, why should we be concerned, because assuming 8 or 10 years from now they have 60 or 70 or 80 missiles, and assuming that is the case, no rational man who was the leader of that country would launch an attack against the United States knowing that our immense retaliatory power would destroy half of the population of Communist China. 
I agree with that analysis. But when we examine history, we find within the last third of a century that sometimes decisions by great powers, as well as small, are not made by rational men. Hitler was not a particularly rational man in some of his military decisions. 
So it is the responsibility of the President of the United States not only to plan against the expected, and against what normal and rational men will do, but within a certain area of contingency to plan against the possibility of an irrational attack


156 - The President's News Conference
April 18, 1969

The other reason, and I emphasize this strongly, is that the Chinese Communists, according to our intelligence, have not moved as fast recently as they had over the past 3 to 4 years, but that, nevertheless, by 1973 or 1974 they would have a significant nuclear capability which would make our diplomacy not credible in the Pacific unless we could protect our country against a Chinese attack aimed at our cities

Our intelligence and, of course, no one can be sure here, indicates that the Soviet Union was not aware that this attack was to be made. North Korea is not a nation that is predictable in terms of its actions. It is perhaps more than any other nation in the Communist bloc completely out of the control of either the Soviet Union or, for that matter, Communist China. That, at least, is our intelligence estimate at this time



211 - Remarks at a Concert by the University of Minnesota Band.
May 23, 1969

In addition to that, this musical organization went to Alma-Ata, which is down in what is called the Asian part of the Soviet Union. It is only about 100 miles from the Chinese border. It is a very different part of the country. It is called the country where the apples 



273 - Remarks to American Field Service Students.
July 22, 1969

Let me look just a little further ahead in another way. I thought one of the, shall we say, rather sad things about that great day on Monday when man first stepped on the moon was that while most of the peoples of the world saw it on television or participated in it on television or radio, that there was approximately one-half the world that did not see it, the whole of Communist China, and the world of the Soviet Union



365 - Address Before the 24th Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
September 18, 1969
Whenever the leaders of Communist China choose to abandon their self-imposed isolation, we are ready to talk with them in the same frank and serious spirit

390 - Remarks at a Ceremony Commemorating the Establishment of the People-to-People Program.
October 14, 1969

That is why in this administration we strongly support not only the People-to. People program as it presently exists, but we hope that it can be expanded more and more to an exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union, between the United States and other Eastern European countries, and, eventually, we would hope, also between the United States and that great potential power of people that exists in mainland China


425 - Address to the Nation on the War in Vietnam
November 3, 1969

Fifteen years ago North Vietnam, with the logistical support of Communist China and the Soviet Union, launched a campaign to impose a Communist government on South Vietnam by instigating and supporting a revolution



499 - Remarks at a News Briefing on Vice President Agnew's Forthcoming Trip to Asia.
December 24, 1969

He will be swinging out across the Pacific, stopping at Guam, going first to the Philippines, then to the Republic of China, to Thailand, Nepal, Afghanistan, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia, New Zealand, and then back to the United States



9 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 22, 1970

I would not underestimate our differences, but we are moving with precision and purpose from an era of confrontation to an era of negotiation. 
Our negotiations on strategic arms limitations and in other areas will have far greater chance for success if both sides enter them motivated by mutual self-interest rather than naive sentimentality. 
It is with this same spirit that we have resumed discussions with Communist China in our talks at Warsaw. 
Our concern in our relations with both these nations is to avoid a catastrophic collision and to build a solid basis for peaceful settlement of our differences.



20 - The President's News Conference
January 30, 1970

The area defense, on the other hand, is absolutely essential as against any minor power, a power, for example, like Communist China. I don't anticipate an attack by Communist China, but if such a power had some capability with ICBM's to reach the United States, an area defense, according to the information we have received, is virtually infallible against that kind of potential attack, and, therefore, gives the United States a credible foreign policy in the Pacific area which it otherwise would not have

Ten years from now the Communist Chinese, for example, among others, may have a significant nuclear capability. They will not be a major nuclear power, but they will have a significant nuclear capability. By that time the war in Vietnam will be over. By that time, I would trust, also, the Laotian war may be resolved. 
But, on the other hand, with a significant nuclear capability, assuming that we have not made a breakthrough--and we are going to try to make the breakthrough in some nonrealization of our relationships with Communist China--then it will be very important for the United States to have some kind of defense so that nuclear blackmail could not be used against the United States or against those nations like the Philippines with which the United States is allied in the Pacific, not to mention Japan



87 - The President's News Conference
March 21, 1970

Thailand also is a signatory of the Geneva accords of 1962 and under those circumstances would be expected to respond to requests by the Government of Laos, set up under those accords and agreed to by all of the parties including the North Vietnamese and the Communist Chinese, and would be expected to provide some assistance


176 - Remarks to the Presidential Scholars of 1970.
June 4, 1970

Then, further down the road, I think of another part of the whole international scene that often we do not adequately think of in terms of what the future may be. I think not only of the Soviet Union, a superpower like the United States, I think of the other half of the Communist world, Communist China, 700 million people, not yet a superpower, but 700 million people isolated not only from the United States and the free world but isolated from the Communist world. And I think of what a dangerous world it would be and what an unhappy world it would be if those 700 million people, 10 years from now, when you will have been out of college 5 or 6 years, or 20 years from now when you will have been out 15 years, if those 700 million, who will then be 800 million or 900 million, are still living in angry isolation from all the rest of the world.


208 - A Conversation With the President About Foreign Policy.
July 1, 1970

I suppose it could be said that simply saving 17 million people in South Vietnam from a Communist takeover isn't worth the efforts of the United States. But let's go further. If the United States, after all of this effort, if we were to withdraw immediately, as many Americans would want us to do-and it would be very easy for me to do it and simply blame it on the previous administration but if we were to do that, I would probably survive through my term, but it would have, in my view, a catastrophic effect on this country and the cause of peace in the years ahead. Now I know them are those who say the domino theory is obsolete. They haven't talked to the dominoes. They should talk to the Thais, to the Malaysians, to the Singaporans, to the Indonesians, to the Filipinos, to the Japanese, and the rest. And if the United States leaves Vietnam in a way that we are humiliated or defeated, not simply speaking in what is called jingoistic terms, but in very practical terms, this will be immensely discouraging to the 300 million people from Japan clear around to Thailand in free Asia; and even more important it will be ominously encouraging to the leaders of Communist China and the Soviet Union who are supporting the North Vietnamese. It will encourage them in their expansionist policies in other areas

Let it also be noted that in no country in the world today in which the Communists are in power have they come to power as a result of the people choosing them--not in North Vietnam, not in North Korea, not in China, not in Russia, and not in any one of the countries of Eastern Europe, and not in Cuba. In every case, communism has come to power by other than a free election, so I think we are in a pretty safe position on this particular point

Neither Communist China, in my view, nor the Soviet Union will have a confrontation with the United States about Vietnam, although many have feared that. But it has not happened, and it will not happen, in my opinion



227 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. No. As you there was slight movement before in the meetings we had in Warsaw. We are still hopeful that those meetings will be resumed. 
But I have nothing to report on any movement toward resuming them at this point, although we think there is a chance they may be moving



312 - Informal Exchange With Reporters in Naples, Italy.
September 29, 1970

For example, when Ho Chi Minh died he had been sick for some time, and he was a very old man. Everybody is speculating what is going to happen when there is a change of leadership in China. That doesn't mean the speculation is always right, but at least people have had a chance to think about it. But no one thought that President Nasser's death would occur in such an untimely way



388 - Toasts of the President and President Ceausescu of Romania.
October 26, 1970

It happens that in the world today because of the divisions, there are times when the leader of one nation does not have adequate communication with the leader of another. But as I was saying to the President earlier today, he is in a rather unique position. He heads a government which is one of the few in the world which has good relations with the United States, good relations with the Soviet Union, and good relations with the People's Republic of China



454 - The President's News Conference
December 10, 1970

Now not out of any sense of jingoism but because this plane is going to be built, because it's going to bring, for example, Asia, not only Japan but China, in the last third of this century 3 hours from the West Coast to Asia--I think the United States should build it, and I believe that we can answer the arguments of the conservationists

THE PRESIDENT. No, our policy wouldn't be based on expediency. It would be based on principle. We have no plans to change our policy with regard to the admission of Red China to the United Nations at this time. However, we are going to continue the initiative that I have begun, an initiative of relaxing trade restrictions and travel restrictions and attempting to open channels of communication with Communist China, having in mind the fact that looking long toward the future we must have some communication and eventually relations with Communist China


61 - The President's News Conference
February 17, 1971

As far as the actions in southern Laos are concerned, they present no threat to Communist China and should not be interpreted by the Communist Chinese as being a threat against them. 
As you know, the Communist Chinese have been operating in northern Laos for some time. But this action is not directed against Communist China. It is directed against the North Vietnamese who are pointed toward South Vietnam and toward Cambodia. 
Consequently, I do not believe that the Communist Chinese have any reason to interpret this as a threat against them or any reason therefore to react to it

73 - Radio Address About Second Annual Foreign Policy Report to the Congress.
February 25, 1971

Here the doctrine that took shape last year is taking hold today, helping to spur self-reliance and cooperation between states. In Japan, South Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines, we have consolidated bases and reduced American forces. We have relaxed trade and travel restrictions to underline our readiness for greater contact with Communist China.
--We will search for consecutive discussions with Communist China while maintaining our defense commitment to Taiwan. When the Government of the People's Republic of China is ready to engage in talks, it will find us receptive to agreements that further the legitimate national interests of China and its neighbors. 
In Asia, we can see tomorrow's world in microcosm. An economically powerful democratic free nation, Japan, is seeking new markets; a potentially powerful Communist nation, China, will one day seek new outlets and new relations; a Communist competitor, the Soviet Union, has interests there as well; and the independent non-Communist nations of Southeast Asia are already working together in regional association. These great forces are bound to interact in the not too distant future. In the way they work together and in the way we cooperate with their relationship is the key to permanent peace in that area--the Far East, the scene of such a painful legacy of the recent past, can become an example of peace and stability in the future



88 - The President's News Conference on Foreign Policy
March 4, 1971
THE PRESIDENT. I understand the apprehension in Taiwan, but I believe that that apprehension, insofar as Taiwan's continued existence and as its continued membership in the United Nations, is not justified. You will also have noted that in my foreign policy report I said that we stood by our defense commitments to Taiwan; that Taiwan, which has a larger population than two-thirds of all of the United Nations, could not and would not be expelled from the United Nations as long as we had anything to say about it; and that as far as our attitude toward Communist China was concerned that that would be governed by Communist China's attitude toward us. 
In other words, we would like to normalize relations with all nations in the world. There has, however, been no receptivity on the part of Communist China. But under no circumstances will we proceed with a policy of normalizing relations with Communist China if the cost of that policy is to expel Taiwan from the family of nations
THE PRESIDENT. That is a moot question at this time, because Communist China or the People's Republic of China, which I understand stirred up people in Taiwan--because that is the official name of the country--but Communist China refuses even to discuss the matter. Therefore, it would not be appropriate for me to suggest what we might agree to when Communist China takes the position that they will have no discussion whatever until Taiwan gets out. And we will not start with that kind of a proposition


110 - "A Conversation With the President," Interview With Howard K. Smith of the American Broadcasting Company
March 22, 1971

Let's understand. Let's look at Cambodia for just a moment. I just saw a summary of the 2 weeks' coverage by the television networks and by the newspapers, and I do not claim that this was deliberate or distorted or anything. Let's understand that. I am not here to bait the press and you are not here to bait me. We are just trying to get the facts. But for 2 weeks, and there were some notable exceptions that we don't need to go into-but for 2 weeks the overwhelming majority of the Nation's press and television, after Cambodia, carried three themes: One, the Chinese might intervene; second, American casualties would soar, the war would be expanded; and, third, there was a danger that the American withdrawal would therefore be jeopardized. 
Now, none of those things happened. The Chinese did not intervene. American casualties were cut in half. They are one-half as great after Cambodia as before. And the withdrawal rate, as a matter of fact, slightly increased after Cambodia because of its success.



144 - Panel Interview at the Annual Convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
April 16, 1971

I believe now we are ending American involvement in a war we are in, a very difficult war. But we are going to end it in a way that will contribute to a lasting peace. And then beyond that I believe that we are entering a new era of relations with other super powers in the world, a new era, for example, in our relations with the Soviet Union and a new era in potential relationships with the People's Republic of China. I don't mean that at 3 a.m. in the morning I make decisions as to what we are going to do about China policy or Soviet policy or the Mideast or Berlin or the rest, but I do know that sometimes the mind is clearer then; the thoughts come through much sharper than they do in the morning

And I think the repercussions will go clear up to Japan, because as we look at the rimland of Asia, we must remember that in all of the debate at the present time and the great interest, understandably, in what has happened with regard to Mainland China this last week, that on the rimland of Asia live 300 million people. They produce three times as much as Mainland China and whether those people are going to remain free nations, independent nations, depends upon whether they think they have the capability and whether they can develop the capability of self-defense

Let the record show--and some of you will remember that time I was here in 1968--that Mr. Dedmon was the one that asked me the question about the People's Republic of China, or Mainland China if you want to call it that, and also let the record show, as you may recall, that at an editorial conference at the Chicago Sun-Times last year you asked me the question again. 
The first two times I struck out. The third time we got a hit. That is all we can say. 
Let me put it all in perspective, however. 
What we have here is the result of a long process that began in my own thoughts even before 1968, the spring of 1968, when I answered that question at this convention. I wrote an article for Foreign Affairs--as a matter of fact, I think your question played off of that article at that time--in which I pointed out that we could not have what will be by the end of the century a billion of the most creative and able people in the world isolated from the world and that whoever was President of the United States had to develop a policy which would bring the isolation of a billion Chinese from the rest of the world to an end. 
I also pointed out that that was a long-range goal. The long-range goal of this Administration and of the next one, whatever it may be, must be two things: one, a normalization of the relations between the Government of the United States and the Government of the People's Republic of China, and two, the ending of the isolation of Mainland China from the world community.
Those are long-range goals. 
Let's begin with what we have done then. We can't go that far that fast in one jump. We cannot do it now. I will not speculate on it now, because it is premature to talk about either of those subjects, either recognition or admission to the U.N. 
But I can point to the goal and what we have done to get toward that goal and what it can mean to the future. 
Over a year ago we relaxed, as you know, our travel conditions with regard to going to China, and also we made some relaxation with regard to trade. 
Finally, we had a response from the Chinese, as you know, last week. Then, on Wednesday of this week, I announced an additional relaxation with regard to trade restrictions and a relaxation with regard to Chinese who wanted to come to the United States. 
Now it is up to them. If they want to have trade in these many areas that we have opened up, we are ready. If they want to have Chinese come to the United States, we are ready. We are also ready for Americans to go there, Americans in all walks of life. 
But it takes two, of course. We have taken several steps. They have taken one. We are prepared to take other steps in the trade field and also with regard to the exchange field, but each step must be taken one at a time. 
I know that as editors and as reporters, looking for that, you know, that hot lead or headline for the morning, this is not a satisfying answer. But from the standpoint of policy, it is theright answer. Because to try to make a headline by saying that tomorrow we are going to do this or that or the other thing would be misunderstood among many countries of the world where this matter has to be discussed and also might have exactly the reverse reaction with the Chinese. 
I think the steady, ordered process that we have engaged on now begins to bear fruit. I will just conclude with this one thought: 
The other day was Easter Sunday. Both of my daughters, Tricia and Julie, were there--and Tricia with Eddie Cox--I understand they are getting married this June--and Julie and David Eisenhower. 
And the conversation got around to travel and also, of course, with regard to honeymoon travel and the rest. They were asking me where would you like to go? Where do you think we ought to go? 
So, I sat back and thought a bit and said, "Well, the place to go is to Asia." I said, "I hope that sometime in your life, sooner rather than later, you will be able to go to China to see the great cities, and the people, and all of that, there." 
I hope they do. As a matter of fact, I hope sometime I do. I am not sure that it is going to happen while I am in office. I will not speculate with regard to either of the diplomatic points. It is premature to talk about recognition. It is premature also to talk about a change of our policy with regard to the United Nations. 
However, we are going to proceed in these very substantive fields of exchange of persons and also in the field of trade. That will open the way to other moves which will be made at an appropriate time.
What I want first and above all, of course, is to end the war that we are in, and to build a lasting peace, through what we are doing in China, the Soviet Union, the SALT talks, the Mideast--there are problems all over the world




154 - The President's News Conference
April 29, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Cormier, that recommendation by that very distinguished committee, of course, is being given consideration in the high councils of this Government, and I am, of course, considering it along with recommendations which move in the other direction. 
I think, however, that your question requires that I put, perhaps, in perspective much of this discussion about our new China policy. I think that some of the speculation that has occurred in recent weeks since the visit of the table tennis team to Peking has not been useful. 
I want to set forth exactly what it is and what it is not. 
First, as I stated at, I think, one of my first press conferences in this room, the long-range goal of this Administration is a normalization of our relationships with Mainland China, the People's Republic of China, and the ending of its isolation from the other nations of the world. That is a long-range goal. 
Second, we have made some progress toward that goal. We have moved in the field of travel; we have moved in the field of trade. There will be more progress made. For example, at the present time I am circulating among the departments the items which may be released as possible trade items in the future, and I will be making an announcement on that in a very few weeks. 
But now when we move from the field of travel and trade to the field of recognition of the Government, to its admission to the United Nations, I am not going to discuss those matters, because it is premature to speculate about that. 
We are considering all those problems. When I have an announcement to make, when a decision is made--and I have not made it yet--I will make it. 
But up until that time we will consider all of the proposals that are being made. We will proceed on the path that we have been proceeding on. And that is the way to make progress. Progress is not helped in this very sensitive area by speculation that goes beyond what the progress might achieve. 
I would just summarize it this way: What we have done has broken the ice; now we have to test the water to see how deep it is. 
I would finally suggest that--I know this question may come up if I don't answer it now--I hope, and, as a matter of fact, I expect to visit Mainland China sometime in some capacity--I don't know what capacity. But that indicates what I hope for the long term. And I hope to contribute to a policy in which we can have a new relationship with Mainland China
THE PRESIDENT. I noted speculation to the effect from various departments and various sources that the way for these two entities to settle their differences was to negotiate directly. I think that is a nice legalistic way to approach it, but I think it is completely unrealistic. I am only saying at this point that the United States is seeking to, in a very measured way, while maintaining our treaty commitments to Taiwan--we are seeking a more normal relationship with the People's Republic of China. 
There is one other point I think it is very important to make. 
There has been speculation to the effect that the purpose of our--or one purpose of our normalizing our relations or attempting to normalize our relations with Mainland China is to some way irritate the Soviet Union. Nothing could be further from the truth. 
We are seeking good relations with the Soviet Union, and I am not discouraged by the SALT talk progress. I can only say that we believe that the interests of both countries would be served by an agreement there. We seek good relations with the Soviet Union; we are seeking good relations with Communist China. And the interests of world peace require good relations between the Soviet Union and Communist China. It would make no sense for the United States, in the interest of world peace, to try to get the two to get at each other's throats, because we would be embroiled in the controversy ourselves. 
THE PRESIDENT. I am not referring to any invitation. I am referring only to a hope and an expectation that at some time in my life and in some capacity, which, of course, does not put any deadline on when I would do it, that I would hope to go to Mainland China
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Bailey, what I meant to convey was that both within the Administration and from sources outside the Administration, there are those who favor a two-China policy; there are those who favor universality in the United Nations; there are those who favor a one-China policy, either Mainland China or Taiwan China. 
All of these are positions that are taken. I am not suggesting that they are lively options as far as I am concerned. What I am saying is that this is a very complex problem. I will make the decision after advising with the Secretary of State and my other chief advisers in this field, and when I make it, I will announce it. But I am not going to speculate on it now because I emphasize this is a very sensitive area, and too much speculation about it might destroy or seriously imperil what I think is the significant progress we have made, at least in the travel area, and possibly in the trade area, looking to the future



173 - Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American National Red Cross.
May 19, 1971

I can tell you that despite the differences that presently exist, and have existed, between governments, that I am convinced that the time will come when our two peoples, the Chinese people, wherever they are, on the mainland or elsewhere, and the American people, will again live together in peace and friendship, because he said, "As the visit that you and Mrs. Nixon have paid to our school today demonstrates, we are all brothers in our hearts." 
As I have often said, and I am sure you will agree with this sentiment: I want the world then, and as soon before then as we can bring it about, to be one in which our children .can go to any country in the world so that they can know the people, whether they are Chinese or Russian, or whatever country they may be in. 


182 - Remarks to Southern News Media Representatives Attending a Briefing on Domestic Policy in Birmingham, Alabama.
May 25, 1971

few weeks ago you all, of course, covered in your newspapers, on your television and radio programs, the developments with regard to China, Mainland China. 
In a recent press conference, you may recall that I said that--when asked about what this meant--I said we must realize that what happened was significant; not simply the visit of the table tennis team, that had some significance and, of course, great interest because of its rather bizarre character as far as we were concerned. But because in the field of travel and in the field of trade, in the field of exchange of persons and in the field of trade, to put it more precisely, we see a very significant change occurring for the first time since the Government which presently is in power in Mainland China---the People's Republic of China--for the first time that Government and the Government of the United States have found two areas, exchange of persons and travel, where again, on a precise step-by-step basis, they are beginning to have a different relationship than they had previously. As I put it, what we have done really is broken the ice; now we have to test the water to see how deep it is. More steps will be taken on our part and on their part when it is to the reciprocal interest of both to do so. 
I do not suggest that any steps are presently being contemplated on either side. That would not be in the interest of having that come about. But I do say that the very fact that the United States and the Government on Mainland China, the People's Republic of China, have finally moved in these limited areas toward a relation of normalcy gives us hope that not immediately--not within a year, for example--but looking to the future, that 800 million Chinese will not be isolated from the rest of the world
Third, a change, not as significant, as far as our relations with the Mainland Government are concerned in China, but nevertheless looking down the road, with great historical possibilities

Here I think that we have to be---as opinion leaders in the South, I would commend these thoughts to you as they have been commended to me by my advisers-here we must recognize that there will be no instant peace in any part of the world. Once these different relationships occur, if they do, if progress is made with the Soviet Union, later with China, the People's Republic, in the Mideast and in Vietnam and the rest, this does not mean that as a result of these developments that the differences between nations end, that their interests will be the same, and that the need for a continued, strong American presence in the world and strong defense will have evaporated



187 - Remarks to the Corps of Cadets at the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York.
May 29, 1971

More and more, we have good grounds to believe that this hope for a new era of world peace will come true. America and the Soviet Union, the two super powers, arecommitted more seriously than ever before to working out an agreement that will limit strategic arms. America and Mainland China, after more than 20 years of hostility and isolation, are beginning to move toward a new and more normal relationship. The nations of Europe are taking important steps toward greater unity. The truce in the Mideast will soon be a year old



189 - The President's News Conference
June 1, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. With regard to the United Nations question, a significant change has taken place among the members of the United Nations on the issue of admission of Mainland China. We are now analyzing that situation in consultations with the Republic of China on Taiwan and with third countries. 
After we have completed our analysis, which I would imagine would take approximately 6 weeks, we will then decide what position we, the Government of the United States, should take at the next session of the United Nations this fall, and we will have an announcement to make at that time with regard to that particular problem. 
A number of various options are open to us.
With regard to trade, the various agencies have now completed their review of the situation and have submitted their recommendations to me. And on June 10, I will make an announcement releasing a wide variety of items which previously had been banned. These are all nonstrategic items in which trade can be conducted with Mainland China. 
Let me put all of this in context by saying that there are only two areas where we have moved. They are significant, however, in themselves. In the area of opening the door to travel and opening the door to more trade, we have made significant movement. I think what, however, we should realize is that we still have a long way to go. 
As I recall, there is a Chinese proverb to the effect that a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. We have taken two steps, but the important thing is that we have started the journey toward a more normal relationship with Mainland China; and eventually--and this is vitally important--ending its isolation and the isolation of 700 million people from the rest of the people of the world. This we think is a goal well worth pursuing


193 - Remarks to Delegates Attending the National Explorer Presidents' Congress.
June 2, 1971

What we are trying to do through our new initiatives in foreign policy is not only to bring peace to America and to the world but to open up the world, to open up the world so that your generation can not only know America and Europe and South America and Africa, but you can know Asia and the great legion of people who now live in Mainland China


204 - Remarks to Eastern Media Executives Attending a Briefing on Domestic Policy in Rochester, New York.
June 18, 1971

So that we don't have any false sense of euphoria--and in this area I think I would be the last to accept the charge of being euphoric about our relations with countries that have very different interests from ours--but so that we don't have any false sense of euphoria, let me set forth our relations first with the Soviet Union, then with Mainland China, and, finally, in terms of our foreign policy generally

Turning briefly to China, we should not overestimate what has happened. I do not refer, of course, to the visit of the table tennis team, but I am referring to the more significant fact: What has happened is that we have opened the door as far as trade and travel are concerned to Mainland China. That door now being open, we shall see what comes through the door. The question, of course, which we must consider is: Why, what does it mean? 
Let me put it in perspective this way: As far as Mainland China is concerned, it is at present not a major nuclear power. It at present is not a major economic power. Japan, with one-fifth of the population of Mainland China, has one and a half times as much GNP as Mainland China. 
But looking down to the end of this century, to the kind of a world that we leave for our children, we will have a billion Chinese who, because they are Chinese--not because they have a Communist government--are among the most creative and dynamic people in the world, a billion Chinese. 
If we have those billion Chinese people outside the world community, living in isolation--isolated, of course, by the Soviet Union, as is the present case, and isolated from the other major power, the United States, with Japan in the middle-you can see what the prospects for peace in the Pacific might be, how dim they might be. And you can also see what the dangers might be, regardless of what agreements the Soviet Union and the United States might make out to reduce tensions that we have, regardless of what might happen in other parts of the world. Therefore, anyone in a position of responsibility at this time in the United States must look to that future and in a careful, measured way, as we are, move toward a normalization of relations--and it will not come quickly--and toward a time when Mainland China will not be isolated from the world community. 
We are making progress. I think that the prospects are that more will be made, and I would suggest that it might well be--I do not know how history ever judges an administration; no man knows while he is in the job--but it might well be that the most significant thing that happened during this Administration has been that we took the first step of a journey that takes a thousand miles.


222 - Remarks to Midwestern News Media Executives Attending a Briefing on Domestic Policy in Kansas City, Missouri.
July 6, 1971

I am not suggesting that these negotiations are going to lead to instant peace and instant relationships with the Soviet Union such as we presently have with our friends in Western Europe and with our friends in Asia who may be allied with us, or who may have systems of government that are more closely aligned to ours. What we have to recognize is that even as we limit arms, if we do reach an agreement in that field, and even if we find ways to avoid confrontation in other areas, and perhaps work out negotiated settlements for mutual force reductions in Europe, the problem of Berlin, all the others that come to mind, we must recognize that the Soviet Union will continue to be a very potent, powerful, and aggressive competitor of the United States of America. And, ironically---and this is also true of Mainland China, as I will point out in a moment--as we have more and more success on the negotiation front, as for example the Soviet Union, like the United States, may be able if we have a limitation in nuclear arms, if we are able to turn our eyes more toward our economic development and our economic problems, it simply means that the competition changes and becomes much more challenging in the economic area than it has been previously. 
Mainland China is, of course, a very different situation. First in terms of its economic capacity at the present time, a pretty good indication of where it is is that Japan, with 100 million people, produces more than Mainland China, with 800 million people. But that should not mislead us, and it gives us, and should give none of the potential competitors in world markets of Mainland China, any sense of satisfaction that it will always be that way. Because when we see the Chinese as people--and I have seen them all over the world, and some of you have, too, whether in Hong Kong, or whether in Taiwan, or whether they are in Singapore or Bangkok, any of the great cities, Manila, where Chinese are there--they are creative, they are productive, they are one of the most capable people in the world. And 800 million Chinese are going to be, inevitably, an enormous economic power, with all that that means in terms of what they could be in other areas if they move in that direction. 
That is the reason why I felt that it was essential that this Administration take the first steps toward ending the isolation of Mainland China from the world community. We had to take those steps because the Soviet Union could not, because of differences that they have that at the present time seem to be irreconcilable. We were the only other power that could take those steps. 
Let me be very, shall I say, limited in what I would discuss on this particular issue, because we should not consider that more has happened than has happened. What we have done is simply opened the door--opened the door for travel, opened the door for trade. 
Now the question is whether there will be other doors opened on their part. But at least the doors must be opened and the goal of U.S. policy must be, in the long term, ending the isolation of Mainland China and a normalization of our relations with Mainland China because, looking down the road--and let's just look ahead 15 to 20 years--the United States could have a perfectly effective agreement with the Soviet Union for limitation of arms; the danger of any confrontation there might have been almost totally removed. 
But Mainland China, outside the world community, completely isolated, with its leaders not in communication with world leaders, would be a danger to the whole world that would be unacceptable, unacceptable to us and unacceptable to others as well. 
So consequently, this step must be taken now. Others must be taken, very precisely, very deliberately, as there is reciprocation on the other side. 
But now let's see how this all fits into the economic program that I mentioned a moment ago, and the economic challenge. The very success of our policy of ending the isolation of Mainland China will mean an immense escalation of their economic challenge not only to us but to others in the world. 
I again come back to the fundamental point: 800 million Chinese, open to the world, with all the communication and the interchange of ideas that inevitably will occur as a result of that opening, will become an economic force in the world of enormous potential. 
So, in sum, what do we see? What we see as we look ahead 5 years, 10 years, perhaps it is 15, but in any event, within our time, we see five great economic super powers: the United States, Western Europe, the Soviet Union, Mainland China, and, of course, Japan



231 - Remarks to the Nation Announcing Acceptance of an Invitation To Visit the People's Republic of China.
July 15, 1971

As I have pointed out on a number of occasions over the past 3 years, there can be no stable and enduring peace without the participation of the People's Republic of China and its 750 million people. That is why I have undertaken initiatives in several areas to open the door for more normal relations between our two countries. 
In pursuance of that goal, I sent Dr. Kissinger, my Assistant for National Security Affairs, to Peking during his recent world tour for the purpose of having talks with Premier Chou En-lai. 
The announcement I shall now read is being issued simultaneously in Peking and in the United States: 
Premier Chou En-lai and Dr. Henry Kissinger, President Nixon's Assistant for National Security Affairs, held talks in Peking from July 9 to 11, 1971. Knowing of President Nixon's expressed desire to visit the People's Republic of China, Premier Chou Enlai, on behalf of the Government of the People's Republic of China, has extended an invitation to President Nixon to visit China at an appropriate date before May 1972. President Nixon has accepted the invitation with pleasure. 
The meeting between the leaders of China and the United States is to seek the normalization of relations between the two countries and also to exchange views on questions of concern to the two sides. 
In anticipation of the inevitable speculation which will follow this announcement, I want to put our policy in the clearest possible context. 
Our action in seeking a new relationship with the People's Republic of China will not be at the expense of our old friends. It is not directed against any other nation. We seek friendly relations with all nations. Any nation can be our friend without being any other nation's enemy. 
I have taken this action because of my profound conviction that all nations will gain from a reduction of tensions and a better relationship between the United States and the People's Republic of China. 
It is in this spirit that I will undertake what I deeply hope will become a journey for peace, peace not just for our generation but for future generations on this earth we share together



242 - Remarks on Arrival at Canton, Ohio
July 30, 1971

I am going to try to contribute to that peace--not just for our generation but for these young people in that band, and the rest, for your generation--by a journey to Mainland China, so that in the future the 800 million people who live-and that is one-fourth of all the people in the world--who live there, will not live in isolation from the rest of the world. This is truly one world, and we must know all the people in the world. That is, of course, the reason for that journey


243 - Remarks at the Professional Football Hall of Fame Annual Banquet in Canton, Ohio.
July 30, 1971

In that connection, I would say that while America is entering very possibly a period of peace such as we haven't enjoyed in this century, it will be a period of enormous challenge, because all over the world--800 million Chinese, 250 million Russians, 300 million Europeans, 250 million in Latin America, 700 million in South Asia, another 200 million on the rim of Asia--there are people all over the world who are becoming more competitive. 
At the present time the United States is still the strongest nation in the world, and we are still the richest nation in the world. But we must remember that in those past 21 years we have the nations of Western Europe, completely recovered from World War II, competing with us. We have the potential competition of 800 million in China, and all of these other nations that I have mentioned; the competition from Japan, the competition from the Soviet Union. This, however, should not be considered by Americans to be simply a problem that we wish would go away


245 - Remarks at the Dedication of the Rathbun Dam Near Centerville, Iowa.
July 31, 1971

Also, as you have heard, I am planning a journey to Mainland China. The purpose of that journey involves not just peace for my generation, but even more, it affects peace for generations to come, because looking far to the future we cannot have a peaceful world if 800 million of the most creative, able people in the world, one-fourth of all the people in the world, are isolated from the rest of the world. 
So that is why I believe the President of the United States should take the first step to establish a new communication with that one-fourth of the world's people who live in Mainland China, so that we can have a better chance for peace in the generations to come. 
Getting peace is not easy; keeping the peace is not easy. But I can assure you that we are dedicated to that proposition. It is a goal that I think we have a very good chance to achieve. 
We are learning that Western Europe, the Soviet Union, the potential of Mainland China, Japan, not to mention the other great areas of the world, more and more are developing the ability to compete with the United States of America



250 - The President's News Conference
August 4, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. As far as the timing is concerned, I cannot add to what I said in the original announcement. It will be before May 1. The time will be worked out sometime within the next 2 to 3 months, I would assume, and a considerable amount of preparatory activity must take place, setting up the agenda, setting up the number in the official party. These are matters, of course, that must be discussed and worked out before the time of the visit is finally announced. 
As far as our party is concerned, it will be a small working party. The only ones that presently are definitely going are, of course, the Secretary of State and Dr. Kissinger and myself. Beyond that, whatever others will be added will be determined by mutual agreement between the parties concerned. 
Now, as to the effect the visit will have, and the conversations will have, on Vietnam, I will not speculate on that subject. I will only say that as the joint announcement indicated, this will be a wide-ranging discussion of issues concerning both governments. It is not a discussion that is going to lead to instant detente. 
What it really is, is moving--as we have moved, I believe, in the situation with regard to the Soviet Union [China?] from an era of confrontation without communication to an era of negotiation with discussion. It does not mean that we go into these meetings on either side with any illusions about the wide differences that we have. Our interests are very different, and both sides recognized this, in the talks that Dr. Kissinger had, the very extended talks he had with Premier Chou En-lai. We do not expect that these talks will settle all of those differences. 
What is important is that we will have opened communication to see where our differences are irreconcilable, to see that they can be settled peacefully, and to find those areas where the United States, which today is the most powerful nation in the world, can find areas of agreement with the most populous nation in the world which potentially in the future could become the most powerful nation in the world. 
As we look at peace in the world for the balance of this century, and for that matter even in the next century, we must recognize that there cannot be world peace on which all the peoples in the world can rely, on which they have such a great stake, unless there is communication between and some negotiation between these two great super powers, the People's Republic and the United States. 
I have put this in general terms because that is the understanding of the People's Republic, Premier Chou En-lai, and it is our understanding our agenda will be worked out at a later point; before the trip it will be very carefully worked out so that the discussions will deal with the hard problems as well as the easy ones. 
We expect to make some progress, but to speculate about what progress will be made on any particular issue, to speculate, for example, as to what effect this might have on Vietnam, would not serve the interests of constructive talks


284 - Remarks at the Annual Convention of the Associated Milk Producers, Inc., Chicago, Illinois.
September 3, 1971

What we must recognize at this time is that we meet at a period of enormous opportunity and great challenge for America. On the one side, we find the most difficult and the longest war in America's history being brought to an end, and we find, too, that we are beginning to build the structure for a new era of peace in the world. It is not easy; it is not sure. But the journey that I will take to the People's Republic of China, the negotiations that we are undertaking in various areas with the Soviet Union, and the other initiatives that we have undertaken in the field of foreign policy, in my opinion, give us this opportunity: I believe tonight that we have the best chance since the end of World War II for our children to have what we have not had in this century in America--a full generation of peace
One hundred and fifty billion dollars in foreign aid, military and economic, was given by the United States to other nations. And now, 25 years later this is what we find: We find that the United States is still number one in the world economically, but we find that we have competition such as we did not have 25 years ago---competition from Japan, for example, and Asia, competition from the nations of Europe which we helped to rebuild after World War II, competition from the Soviet Union, and in the future the potential competition of the most populous and one of the most creative peoples on the earth, 800 million Chinese.



292 - The President's News Conference
September 16, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Bailey [Charles W. Bailey 2d, Minneapolis Tribune and Minneapolis Star], we spent many months looking into the legality of the situation, and in fairness to Dr. Judd, I should say that there are different legal opinions that you can get with regard to what action is needed for purposes of expulsion and whether Security Council action is required as well as the other. 
We, however, have reached the conclusion that the position we presently take, which has been stated by the Secretary of State and by Ambassador Bush, is the legally sustainable one. 
To put, also, our policy in clear perspective, we favor the admission and will vote for the admission of the People's Republic to the United Nations and that will mean, of course, obtaining a Security Council seat. 
We will vote against the expulsion of the Republic of China, and we will work as effectively as we can to accomplish that goal. 
Beyond that, I would have no further comment at this point. 
THE PRESIDENT. Our analysis indicates that this is really a moot question. In the event that the People's Republic is admitted to the United Nations, the seat in the Security Council would go to the People's Republic and that, of course, would mean the removal of the Republic of China from the Security Council seat. 
The statement that was made yesterday simply reflected the realities of the situation in the United Nations
THE PRESIDENT. First, I am going to China. 
Second, as far as the date of the trip is concerned, and the agenda, the arrangements, are concerned, all of those will be announced at an appropriate time. 
Beyond that, however, I do not think it would be helpful at this point to discuss the date that may be under consideration, the agenda that may be under consideration, and the rest. All I can say is that the plans for the trip are going forward on schedule, and you gentlemen will be the first to know. 
THE PRESIDENT. That is a mutual decision, and we are working it out in a satisfactory way. In a case like this, where two governments are involved, one doesn't pick a date and another pick a date. It is not that kind of operation. It is going very well. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, there was nothing in the Reston piece that he had not already told Dr. Kissinger in much greater detail. 
Second, for that reason we were not surprised at all at the Reston piece. I think one of the reasons that these talks may be productive is that Premier Chou Enlai, both publicly and privately, doesn't take the usual naive, sentimental idea, and neither do I, that, well, if we just get to know each other all of our differences are going to evaporate. 
He recognizes and I recognize that there are very great differences between the People's Republic and the United States of America. He recognizes and I recognize that at this point it might serve our mutual interest to discuss those differences. 
I reiterate, however, as he has reiterated to us, both privately and then repeated in his interview with Mr. Reston in less detail, that while there are differences that we must recognize, that we have agreed to discuss the differences. That is all that has been agreed. There are no other conditions. 
Now that, in my view, is the proper way to begin a conference between two countries that have not had any diplomatic relations
Also I found that Japan at the present time produces more than all of the rest of East Asia combined, including the People's Republic of China. Now that shows you the problem




297 - Remarks at a Question-and-Answer Session With a 10-Member Panel of the Economic Club of Detroit.
September 23, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I do not expect the current developments to change our travel plans, and those plans will be announced, incidentally, at an appropriate time in due course. 
With regard to what we intend to accomplish, I think it is important for us to put it in the context of what we cannot accomplish and do not expect. Some rather naive observers have assumed that because I was going to Mainland China, that the differences between Mainland China and its 800 million people and its Government and that of the United States--that those differences would evaporate. They will not. 
There are very deep differences between the United States and the Government of Mainland China--the People's Republic of China. Premier Chou recognized those in his public statements and in more detail in his private meetings with Dr. Kissinger. Those differences, however, now will be discussed. 
They will be discussed by the President of the United States and by the leader of the People's Republic of China. There have been no conditions on either side, but we have agreed to talk about those differences. 
Now, let me tell you why I think that is important. Ten, 15 years from now, there will be between 900 million and a billion people in Mainland China. Ten or 15 years from now, they will be a very significant nuclear power. 
For Mainland China and its 900 million or a billion people at that time to be out of the family of nations, isolated from the rest of the world, would be a danger to the rest of the world which any man who is President of the United States at this time should try to avert if he can. What I am trying to do is simply to open a dialogue, move toward more normal relations, so that these differences which will continue to exist between our two countries--so that we will talk about them and not fight about them, now or 15 years from now




299 - Remarks on Arrival at Kalispell, Montana.
September 25, 1971

As you know, from here we are going on to Portland and then up to Alaska to welcome the Emperor of Japan. Later, I will have the opportunity to visit Mainland China, the People's Republic of China. Let me just tell you what these visits have to do with this generation of peace. Very simply this: They are not going to solve all differences between nations, particularly with regard to those great differences that exist between the Government of the United States and the Government of the People's Republic of China, with which we do not have diplomatic relations at this time. But they do mean this: They do mean that a step has been taken toward a goal. 
When nations have differences, they can either talk about them and negotiate about them or they can fight about them. If 10 to 15 years from now the People's Republic of China is still isolated from the rest of the world, and particularly with no communication with the United States of America, there is a great danger that due to that isolation we might end in finding that our differences were ones that we could not talk about, and we might end up fighting about. 
I believe we have got to avoid that. I believe the time to start avoiding that is now, to make this an open world in which we negotiate rather than confront those who differ with us around the world



301 - Remarks on Arrival at Portland, Oregon.
September 25, 1971

I think we can have it. Our meeting with Japan has something to do with that. But later a visit that I will make to Mainland China will have something to do with that. Let me tell you why that is important. That visit does not mean that the differences between the Governments of the People's Republic of China and that of the United States are going to evaporate, because they are very great and they are very deep. 
But it does mean this: It does mean that as far as those differences are concerned, we are going to talk about them rather than fight about them, and that is terribly important to the future of peace in the world. 
It also means something else. Eight hundred million people live on Mainland China. That is one-fourth of all the people in the world. I want this younger generation, these young people that I see here today, I want them to grow up in an open world, one in which there can be open communication between the peoples of the world. If we can do that, if we can contribute to that by this initiative, this journey for peace that I am taking, then I think it is worthwhile



303 - Remarks at a Question-and-Answer Session for Northwest Editors, Publishers, and Broadcast Executives Attending a Briefing on Domestic Policy in Portland, Oregon
September 25, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. It would be presumptuous for me to contend that we knew what was happening on the mainland of China at this time. I will only say, however, that whatever is happening, we are proceeding with the plans for the trip that I will be taking to the People's Republic of China. 
Those plans will be announced at an appropriate time, and in that context you can surmise anything you want as to what is happening. 
THE PRESIDENT. In any meeting that occurs with a leader of a Communist country, a meeting must occur not only with the head of government, which in this case, of course, would be Chou En-lai, the Premier, but it must also occur with the Chairman of the Communist Party in that country. 
Now, as far as the meetings in China are concerned, they will be announced, and those who participate in them, at an appropriate time. It would be naturally assumed that when the trip is planned, that a meeting would be planned, a meeting or meetings, with the head of government and with the Chairman of the Communist Party of the People's Republic



304 - Remarks on Arrival at Walla Walla, Washington.
September 26, 1971

Then, at a later time, as you probably have noted, I will be making a trip to Mainland China. There I will meet with the leaders of the People's Republic of China. Eight hundred million people live there, 800 million people who presently are isolated from the rest of the world, in the world community. I would not want any of you to think that this meeting means that the differences between our two nations will end, because they will not. There will be great differences in the years to come. 
But it does mean this: It means that now we begin a dialogue. We take the steps in which we have a chance to talk about our differences, rather than to fight about our differences. And as we look ahead to the future, to the future of these young men, and even the younger ones in the grade school here, 15, 20 years from now, I hope and I pray--and I know that all of you on this Sunday join in that prayer--that when they grow up, that they can grow up in a world that will be an open world in which they can travel to all parts of the world; and that they can grow up in a world where the 800 million people of China are not isolated from the rest of the world, where the danger of war that would exist if they were isolated is reduced, because then, whereas we may have differences, we will talk about them and not fight about them. That is something we all want for America and for the future
I mentioned the visit with the Emperor of Japan. I mentioned the visit that I will be paying to the People's Republic of China. Do you realize that the next quarter of a century will be the era of the Pacific? Think of the millions of people that live there. Think of the trade and everything that will develop in the years ahead there. Here in the Pacific Northwest we have the gateway to the Pacific




305 - Remarks at the Atomic Energy Commission's Hanford Works Near Richland, Washington.
September 26, 1971

Then, I am sure that when I introduced Dr. Kissinger, you will remember that on July 15 I announced that he had been in Peking and that as a result of his visit, I would be paying a visit, the first President of the United States to visit Mainland China. This meeting will take place at a later time. It is a meeting that has been widely speculated about. And I just say this word about what it means, particularly to the young people that are here, because it means, really, far more to you than it does to our generation. 
When we think of what the world is going to be like 15, 20 years from now, just think what it would be like if 800 million of the most capable, able people in the world were isolated from the rest of the world, living--not knowing the rest of the world--outside of the world community and living there with an enormous potential in military power, including nuclear power. It would be a terrible danger. 
So we believe, I believe, that it is essential that now we take the steps, the steps to open a dialogue. It isn't going to settle the differences--they are deep--but to open a dialogue that will discuss those differences, so that now and 5, 10, 15, 20 years from now the people in Government of the United States, the people in Government of the People's Republic of China, while we will continue to have differences, we will talk about them; we will not fight about them. This, we think, is important for the future generation
That is why I made an announcement on June 4,2 one that did not get, of course, the enormous publicity of the announcement of the journey to China, one that did not get the publicity of my announcement of the new economic policy to deal with the problems of inflation and unemployment in this country, but one which in terms of the future of the country may be, in long-range terms, even more important in some respects, and that is that the United States was going to go forward in building a breeder reactor




326 - Remarks at the Mountain State Forest Festival in Elkins, West Virginia.
October 8, 1971

Now I have perhaps one other surprise for you. It might have been covered in the papers, but many of you have been reading about a long journey that I will be taking in the near future which will take me to Mainland China--the first time that a President of the United States has visited that country in which a fourth of all the people of the world live

That has been the purpose of my travels abroad. That will be the purpose of this trip, a trip to Mainland China, a purpose that does not involve what will happen this year, next year, or even 3 or 4 years from now, but that will see to it, we hope, that 15 or 20 years from now, when that child who brought the crown here will possibly be a queen, that she grows up at a time when we have an open world, when the United States of America is not separated from any other nation without any communication with that nation



328 - The President's News Conference
October 12, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. The two are independent trips. We are going to Peking for the purpose of discussing matters of bilateral concern there, and I will be going to the Soviet Union for the purpose of discussing matters that involve the United States and the Soviet Union. Neither trip is being taken for the purpose of exploiting what differences may exist between the two nations; neither is being taken at the expense of any other nation. 
The trips are being taken for the purpose of better relations between the United States and the Soviet Union and better relations between the United States and the People's Republic of China. And any speculation to the effect that one has been planned for the purpose of affecting the other would be entirely inaccurate. 
THE PRESIDENT. It is vitally important, both in the case of 'this trip and the trip to the People's Republic of China--which, as you know, we announced far in advance, the date yet to be selected. Mr. Kissinger will work out that date on his trip, which will take place within the next 2 or 3 weeks.1 

For example, Cuba is one possibility. The question of Southeast Asia is another. As far as Southeast Asia is concerned, I would emphasize there, again, however, that completely without regard to this meeting and completely without regard to the meeting that will take place with the Chinese leaders at an earlier date, we are proceeding both on the negotiating track and on the Vietnamization track to end American involvement in Vietnam. We trust that we will have accomplished that goal, or at least have made significant progress toward accomplishing that goal, by the time this meeting takes place. 
I pointed out then that I did not believe a summit would serve a useful purpose unless something was to come out of it. I do not believe in having summit meetings simply for the purpose of having a meeting. I think that tends to create euphoria. It raises high hopes that are then dashed, as was the case with Glassboro. We are not making that mistake. Both in our meeting with the Chinese which is being very carefully planned, as evidenced by Dr. Kissinger's visit to help prepare the agenda and the final arrangements, and in our meeting with the Soviet Union, we have agreed to summit meetings only on the basis that we would have an agenda in which there was a possibility of making significant progress, and also on which items would be on the agenda on which progress could best be made, and in some instances might only be made, by decisions at the highest level
THE PRESIDENT. No, Mr. Theis [J. William Theis, Hearst Newspapers and Hearst Headline Service], when we announced that we would be going to Peking, we did not have an understanding with the Soviet Union that we were going to have a visit to the Soviet Union. However, I should point out that as far as the announcement with regard to the Soviet summit is concerned, that the Government of the People's Republic of China was informed that this announcement would be made today and is aware of the date of the Soviet visit that I have mentioned, the latter part of May. 
I should also point out that the Government in Peking is aware of the fact that we will be working toward agreement on a date with them, which will be prior to the meeting with the Soviet leaders
THE PRESIDENT. The question as to what kind of meetings will take place in Peking will be worked out by Dr. Kissinger when he is there. There will, of course, be meetings with Chou En-lai. I would assume that there would be meetings with the Chairman. However, in each system, the Soviet system and the Chinese system, the question as to which individual should cover which subject varies, and, of course, I will be prepared to meet with whatever leader in the Soviet Union or whatever leader in the People's Republic of China has the responsibility for the particular subjects that we have in mind. 
I should also point out that the Secretary of State will accompany me to both Moscow and Peking; Dr. Kissinger will accompany me, and it will be a small working group. And meetings will take place not only between the President and various leaders on their side but between the Secretary of State and their people designated by them on their side. 
We expect to have a very busy, working visit, not a ceremonial visit. Ceremony, I should indicate, will be at an absolute minimum in both the Soviet Union and in the People's Republic. 
I emphasize again, the purpose of both visits is not simply cosmetics. We are not taking a trip for the sake of taking a trip. The purpose of these visits is, at the very highest level, to attempt to make progress in negotiating in areas where there are very significant differences--differences between us and the People's Republic, differences between us and the Soviet Union



330 - Remarks at the Unveiling of a Portrait of Representative F. Edward Hebert, Chairman, Committee on Armed Services.
October 12, 1971

Reference was made earlier to the fact that I had made an announcement today with regard to a meeting that will take place next spring at the highest level between the leaders of the United States and the leaders of the Soviet Union. And, of course, all of you are aware of the fact that at an earlier date a meeting will take place between leaders of the United States, including the President, and leaders of Mainland China. 
There could be a tendency to interpret such meetings at the highest levels, unprecedented between the great powers of the earth, as being the end of a period in which the United States needed to be concerned about its strength. That, of course, is not the case. 
We are now in a period of negotiation, as I have often said, but we are in a period, also, when we must never substitute the fact that a meeting is to take place, the fact that negotiations are going on, for the reality of an agreement. Certainly that would be the attitude of the leaders of the Soviet Union. That would also be the attitude of the leaders of the People's Republic of China, Mainland China, and it must be our own


333 - Remarks at Ceremonies Honoring Billy Graham in Charlotte, North Carolina.
October 15, 1971

I think of his wife, Ruth, who has been by his side, born in China of missionary parents, lived there 300 miles from Shanghai for 17 years, and now giving him the support, the strength that any man who is in the arena needs, needs when he goes home. 
Now I would like to speak of what this Nation owes to Billy Graham, and how important his ministry at this time in our history is to America and to the world. He mentioned the fact that I shall be making a journey to Mainland China. You also have heard of the fact that I will be making a journey to the Soviet Union. And as these trips take place, and as we end the longest and most difficult war in America's history, or in any nation's history for that matter, hope springs up in America, as it can, as it should, that we may be seeing an era in which we can have peace, peace not just for a year, or 5 years, or 10 years, but maybe for a generation, maybe longer than that. That is what we are trying to build.



334 - Remarks Announcing the Conversion of Fort Detrick, Maryland, to a Center for Cancer Research.
October 18, 1971

I would finally say this: This facility, which once was so top secret, which was closed not only to Americans but, of course, to anybody from foreign lands, now is open to all people in the world. Wherever scientists or doctors may be, whether in Europe or Latin America or Africa or Asia, they can come here. They are welcome to come here to see what we have done, just as we hope they will welcome us, so that we can see what they have done. And whether they come from the Soviet Union, or perhaps later from Mainland China, we want people from all over the world who are working on what is one of the great initiatives for mankind, finding some way that we can have a conquest of cancer, a cure for it, and a prevention of cancer, so that scientists from all over the world can share the information and work together toward that end.



338 - Remarks at the Convention of the National Federation of Republican Women.
October 22, 1971

But you build a generation of peace by talking not just to your friends but to your opponents. That is one of the reasons why I am making an historic trip to Mainland China. That is one of the reasons why I am also making a trip to the Soviet Union. 
I have no illusions, just as they have no illusions, that these trips are going to solve the differences that exist between great powers that have philosophical and geographical and national differences that cannot be resolved by one meeting, or perhaps by any series of meetings. 
But I do know this: As I look to the future of the world, as I look at the 750 million people who live in Mainland China, as I look at the 300 million people who live in the Soviet Union, I realize that it is far better, even though we have differences that cannot be settled, to talk about those differences than fight about them. And that is what we are going to do. 
I believe that these trips, combined with the other initiatives that we have taken, talking to our friends in Europe, in Latin America, in Africa, and Asia, will help to build the structure which is essential to have a generation of peace

As we look further down the road, certainly the Soviet Union, Mainland China with its 750 million very able people, will be increasingly competitors of the United States in the world economically, militarily perhaps, but also competitors in those things of the spirit to which your convention is addressed



339 - Veterans Day Address.
October 24, 1971

Today we are preparing to take additional steps toward an end to the conflicts which have divided so many of the world's people and which have threatened all of the world's people. My trips to Moscow and Peking are directed toward that goal. We go there with no false hopes, and we intend to leave behind us in America no unrealistic expectations. 
There are great differences between the Government of the United States and the Governments of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China. But we have much in common with the Russian people and the Chinese people. We share this earth. We share a love for our children. And we share an understanding of the ultimate futility of war. 
And so, while the road to a lasting peace may still be long and difficult, yet all that reasonable men may do to accomplish that lasting peace will be done



351 - Remarks at a "Salute to the President" Dinner in New York City.
November 9, 1971

But I think we can say this with regard to such meetings between the leaders of the United States of America and the leaders, on the one hand, of the Soviet Union and, on the other hand, of the People's Republic of China: With continued confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China there would be an unacceptable risk of war in the years ahead. With negotiation between the United States and the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, there is a chance for peace, and we owe it to future generations to seize that chance and that is what we have done

Now, today, 25 years later, much of it as a result of our very proper and generous assistance to those that were defeated in World War II, as well as those who were our allies, we have new competitors, strong competitors: Western Europe, joining together in one of the most powerful economic blocs that the world has ever seen, a strong competitor, whereas it was not one 25 years ago; Japan, prostrate 25 years ago, now the third most powerful economic force in the world; the Soviet Union, of course, the second strongest economic power in the world and, of course, a super power in terms of its nuclear power; and the People's Republic of China, not yet strong in terms of its economic productivity, but with 750 million capable people with the potential of being as strong as it wants to be, because of their potential power



352 - Remarks at a "Salute to the President" Dinner in Chicago, Illinois.
November 9, 1971

Ending the war in Vietnam is one step toward that goal, but looking further down to the end of the century, other steps must be taken now, steps which will see what the dangers are or might be 10 years, 15 years, 20 years from now. And that is the reason why I am making these journeys, one to Moscow, one to Peking. 
I have no illusions, and none of you should have any illusions, that these trips and these meetings between the heads of governments of these three great powers-the United States, the People's Republic of China, and the Soviet Union--will mean that the differences between our countries will end as a result of these meetings. Our differences are profound, profound in their approach and their difference with regard to domestic matters, and profoundly different in their approaches to international affairs. 
But, on the other hand, we face this choice, putting it quite bluntly: We face the choice that continuing confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union, and between the United States and the People's Republic of China, could run the risk of war. 
We also face, on the other side, the choice that negotiation between the United States and the Soviet Union, and between the United States and the People's Republic of China, could give us a chance for peace. And we owe it to future generations to seize that chance and not let it pass by--the chance to build a generation of peace
The Soviet Union is the second strongest economic power in the world. Mainland China, with 750 million people, is not a significant economic power today, but 750 million Chinese, inevitably, over a period of time will be a significant power in the world and a significant competitor




356 - The President's News Conference
November 12, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I do not think it would be helpful to indicate at this time what we will discuss with regard to Indochina when our visits to Peking and Moscow take place. We are hopeful and continue to be hopeful that we can make progress on handling this problem ourselves, and that it may not have to be a problem that will have to be discussed in those areas. 
Incidentally, I think it would not be well to speculate as to what, if anything, either Peking or Moscow can or will do on this matter. All that I can say is that we are charting our own course, and we will find our own way to bring it to a halt. 
We will, of course, welcome any assistance, but we are not counting on it from either source
THE PRESIDENT. I have nothing to announce on that at this time




363 - Remarks to the AFL-CIO Ninth Constitutional Convention in Bal Harbour, Florida.
November 19, 1971

Then why do we go? I will tell you why: It is a practical consideration. There are 250 million people in the Soviet Union. Their nuclear power, as far as land-based missiles is concerned, is presently about equal to ours, and possibly even a bit ahead. There are 750 million people in China. Within 15 years, if they want to do it, their nuclear power will be a very, very significant threat to the peace of the world if they want to be a threat to the peace of the world



378 - Remarks to the National 4-H Congress in Chicago, Illinois.
December 1, 1971

We have acted in an historic step to end the isolation of nearly one-quarter of all the world's people who live on Mainland China. We have moved from confrontation to negotiation with the Soviet Union. with limitation of nuclear arms, relaxation of tensions in Europe, increased trade among the possible results. 
I know these meetings, particularly at the highest level, with the leaders of the Soviet Union and the leaders of the People's Republic of China may lead some to assume that the fact of a meeting means the end of differences between our systems and theirs. 
That, of course, will not be the case; we have basic philosophical differences, basic foreign policy differences. But as we look down the road to the end of the century, what we have to realize is this: that with 250 million people in the Soviet Union and 750 million people in Mainland China, for the United States not to be in a position to talk to those leaders, in the event there is a confrontation some place in the world, could lead to a conflict which would mean suicide for both sides. And that is why we have taken these steps, so that when we do have differences--and we will have differences for many, many years to come--we will talk about them and not fight about them
Political, economic, and military power will be concentrated in many centers instead of just a few. Look at the change, for example, since World War II. Immediately after that war, the United States had no competitors in the world. We produced half the world's goods with 7 percent of the world's people. And now, today, there are five potential economic giants in the world--the new Europe with England in the Common Market, the Soviet Union, Mainland China with 750 million people, and a resurgent Japan, not to mention, of course, the potential for the future from Latin America, Africa, and other parts of Asia




417 - Remarks in an Informal Exchange With German Correspondents Who Accompanied Chancellor Brandt on His Visit to the United States
December 29, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. Well, you know, it is interesting. The Federal Republic has a considerable amount of trade with Mainland China; in fact, next to Japan, among the non-Communist countries, it has the most. It is a subject which we discussed, so I was interested in knowing that


