MID 309801, US v Libya, 10 sep to 10-Oct-81 to 6-Dec-81

Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Middle East Issues 
October 12, 1981

The President. Well, someone else would buy the oil and finance his activities, and so we wouldn't be gaining anything there. 
The President. Well, as I say, I don't think that it would make any difference on that. We might be cutting off our own nose to spite our face
The President. Egypt and the Sudan have a treaty with regard to that. And Egypt has made it plain that they're going to stand by that treaty. And I think if you compare Libya to Egypt, that should restrain—to beat Qadhafi



Exchange With Reporters on Economic and Foreign Policy Issues
October 18, 1981

The President. No, I heard a statement about—that would have to be a worldwide boycott, because there are plenty of customers for oil, and you've got to make sure that none of them would take the place.

The President. I know, I just answered that a moment ago. I heard that. No, as I say, that would have to be worldwide. No one country could affect them by having a boycott. 
The President. No, I haven't talked to anyone

The President's News Conference
November 10, 1981
We have no plans for putting Americans in combat any place in the world. And our goal is peace; it has always been. And at the end of this month, we will go into negotiations with the Soviet Union on what I hope will be reduction of the theatre nuclear weapons in Europe to the lowest point possible



Interview With Joseph Rice of the Cleveland Plain Dealer 
November 30, 1981

The President. Well, we're studying right now our economic relations with them. I think he has made it obvious that he is against most of the things that we're trying to achieve, such as peace in the Middle East, appealing to the moderate Arab nations, and so forth. 
As to his threats personally against me, I think in view of the record, you can't dismiss them out of hand. On the other hand, they're not going to change my life much.
Beyond that, I never comment on security matters. 
The President. Well, I can't go beyond what I've said


Remarks on Signing the Energy and Water Development Appropriation Act, 1982 
December 4, 1981

The President. Oh, I think he figures that I'm concerned. But no—as you know, I hope you'll understand, we don't talk about security measures and situations of this kind. 
The President. I think you have to. I think it safe to say that in any security case, even sometimes when security gets what they think is a crank call, why, they can't take that for granted




