MID 456801, Pakistan


The President's News Conference With President Vicente Fox of Mexico and Prime Minister Paul Martin of Canada in Waco, Texas
March 23, 2005
President Bush. Thank you for bringing up Secretary Rice. She just got back from her trip Monday evening and came down to Crawford yesterday to brief me on the trip. I'm grateful that she took time out of her schedule to come down and talk about not only the discussions she had with China but discussions she had with South Korea and Japan, the leaders of India and Pakistan. And she also went to Afghanistan, so she had an extensive trip. It was about a 2-hour briefing, I want you to know.

Remarks Prior to a Briefing on the Findings of the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction
March 31, 2005
To win the war on terror, we will correct what needs to be fixed and build on what the Commission calls solid intelligence successes. These include the uncovering of Libya's nuclear and missile programs. In Pakistan, our intelligence helped expose and shut down the world's most dangerous nuclear proliferation network. Where we have had success, the Commission reports we have seen innovative collection techniques and a fusion of interagency intelligence capabilities. We must work to replicate these successes in other areas.

The President's Radio Address
April 2, 2005
The Commission's report delivers a sharp critique of the way intelligence has been collected and analyzed against some of the most difficult intelligence targets, like Iraq. To win the war on terror, we will correct what needs to be fixed and build on what the Commission calls "solid intelligence successes." These include the uncovering of Libya's nuclear and missile programs, which led Libya's leader to renounce weapons of mass destruction. In Pakistan, our intelligence helped expose and shut down the world's most dangerous nuclear proliferation network. We need to learn from the successes we've had and apply the lessons elsewhere.

Interview With Estonian Television
May 4, 2005
I've always told the American people here, "It's best to find them where they try to hide so that we don't have to deal with them here at home." And so part of the reasons why there's—activity is up is because we're chasing them down. As a matter of fact, today a big news report came out that I would say one of the top Al Qaida leaders, a person very close to Usama bin Laden, was brought to justice in Pakistan by the Pak Government, with our help, but nevertheless, the Pak Government did the hard work—Abu Faraj al-Libbi. That's a very important part of defeating the Al Qaida.

Remarks in a Discussion on Strengthening Social Security at the Latino Small Business Economic Conference
May 4, 2005
I applaud the Pakistani Government for their strong cooperation in the war on terror. I applaud the Pakistani Government and President Musharraf for acting on solid intelligence to bring this man to justice. The fight continues. We'll stay on the offensive until Al Qaida is defeated.



