MID 397401
US v Iraq, 14 jan to Feb 13, 1991 – Dec 31, 1991


Address to the Nation Announcing Allied Military Action in the Persian Gulf
January 16, 1991

Just 2 hours ago, allied air forces began an attack on military targets in Iraq and Kuwait. These attacks continue as I speak. Ground forces are not engaged. 
This conflict started August 2d when the dictator of Iraq invaded a small and helpless neighbor. Kuwait -- a member of the Arab League and a member of the United Nations -- was crushed; its people, brutalized. Five months ago, Saddam Hussein started this cruel war against Kuwait. Tonight, the battle has been joined. 
This military action, taken in accord with United Nations resolutions and with the consent of the United States Congress, follows months of constant and virtually endless diplomatic activity on the part of the United Nations, the United States, and many, many other countries. Arab leaders sought what became known as an Arab solution, only to conclude that Saddam Hussein was unwilling to leave Kuwait. Others traveled to Baghdad in a variety of efforts to restore peace and justice. Our Secretary of State, James Baker, held an historic meeting in Geneva, only to be totally rebuffed. This past weekend, in a last-ditch effort, the Secretary-General of the United Nations went to the Middle East with peace in his heart -- his second such mission. And he came back from Baghdad with no progress at all in getting Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait. 
Now the 28 countries with forces in the Gulf area have exhausted all reasonable efforts to reach a peaceful resolution -- have no choice but to drive Saddam from Kuwait by force. We will not fail. 
As I report to you, air attacks are underway against military targets in Iraq. We are determined to knock out Saddam Hussein's nuclear bomb potential. We will also destroy his chemical weapons facilities. Much of Saddam's artillery and tanks will be destroyed. Our operations are designed to best protect the lives of all the coalition forces by targeting Saddam's vast military arsenal. Initial reports from General Schwarzkopf are that our operations are proceeding according to plan. 
Our objectives are clear: Saddam Hussein's forces will leave Kuwait. The legitimate government of Kuwait will be restored to its rightful place, and Kuwait will once again be free. Iraq will eventually comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions, and then, when peace is restored, it is our hope that Iraq will live as a peaceful and cooperative member of the family of nations, thus enhancing the security and stability of the Gulf. 
Some may ask: Why act now? Why not wait? The answer is clear: The world could wait no longer. Sanctions, though having some effect, showed no signs of accomplishing their objective. Sanctions were tried for well over 5 months, and we and our allies concluded that sanctions alone would not force Saddam from Kuwait. 
While the world waited, Saddam Hussein systematically raped, pillaged, and plundered a tiny nation, no threat to his own. He subjected the people of Kuwait to unspeakable atrocities -- and among those maimed and murdered, innocent children. 
While the world waited, Saddam sought to add to the chemical weapons arsenal he now possesses, an infinitely more dangerous weapon of mass destruction -- a nuclear weapon. And while the world waited, while the world talked peace and withdrawal, Saddam Hussein dug in and moved massive forces into Kuwait. 
While the world waited, while Saddam stalled, more damage was being done to the fragile economies of the Third World, emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, to the entire world, including to our own economy. 
The United States, together with the United Nations, exhausted every means at our disposal to bring this crisis to a peaceful end. However, Saddam clearly felt that by stalling and threatening and defying the United Nations, he could weaken the forces arrayed against him. 
While the world waited, Saddam Hussein met every overture of peace with open contempt. While the world prayed for peace, Saddam prepared for war. 
I had hoped that when the United States Congress, in historic debate, took its resolute action, Saddam would realize he could not prevail and would move out of Kuwait in accord with the United Nation resolutions. He did not do that. Instead, he remained intransigent, certain that time was on his side. 
Saddam was warned over and over again to comply with the will of the United Nations: Leave Kuwait, or be driven out. Saddam has arrogantly rejected all warnings. Instead, he tried to make this a dispute between Iraq and the United States of America. 
Well, he failed. Tonight, 28 nations -- countries from 5 continents, Europe and Asia, Africa, and the Arab League -- have forces in the Gulf area standing shoulder to shoulder against Saddam Hussein. These countries had hoped the use of force could be avoided. Regrettably, we now believe that only force will make him leave. 
Prior to ordering our forces into battle, I instructed our military commanders to take every necessary step to prevail as quickly as possible, and with the greatest degree of protection possible for American and allied service men and women. I've told the American people before that this will not be another Vietnam, and I repeat this here tonight. Our troops will have the best possible support in the entire world, and they will not be asked to fight with one hand tied behind their back. I'm hopeful that this fighting will not go on for long and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum. 
This is an historic moment. We have in this past year made great progress in ending the long era of conflict and cold war. We have before us the opportunity to forge for ourselves and for future generations a new world order -- a world where the rule of law, not the law of the jungle, governs the conduct of nations. When we are successful -- and we will be -- we have a real chance at this new world order, an order in which a credible United Nations can use its peacekeeping role to fulfill the promise and vision of the U.N.'s founders. 
We have no argument with the people of Iraq. Indeed, for the innocents caught in this conflict, I pray for their safety. Our goal is not the conquest of Iraq. It is the liberation of Kuwait. It is my hope that somehow the Iraqi people can, even now, convince their dictator that he must lay down his arms, leave Kuwait, and let Iraq itself rejoin the family of peace-loving nations. 
Thomas Paine wrote many years ago: "These are the times that try men's souls." Those well-known words are so very true today. But even as planes of the multinational forces attack Iraq, I prefer to think of peace, not war. I am convinced not only that we will prevail but that out of the horror of combat will come the recognition that no nation can stand against a world united, no nation will be permitted to brutally assault its neighbor. 
No President can easily commit our sons and daughters to war. They are the Nation's finest. Ours is an all-volunteer force, magnificently trained, highly motivated. The troops know why they're there. And listen to what they say, for they've said it better than any President or Prime Minister ever could. 
Listen to Hollywood Huddleston, Marine lance corporal. He says, "Let's free these people, so we can go home and be free again." And he's right. The terrible crimes and tortures committed by Saddam's henchmen against the innocent people of Kuwait are an affront to mankind and a challenge to the freedom of all. 
Listen to one of our great officers out there, Marine Lieutenant General Walter Boomer. He said: "There are things worth fighting for. A world in which brutality and lawlessness are allowed to go unchecked isn't the kind of world we're going to want to live in." 
Listen to Master Sergeant J.P. Kendall of the 82d Airborne: "We're here for more than just the price of a gallon of gas. What we're doing is going to chart the future of the world for the next 100 years. It's better to deal with this guy now than 5 years from now." 
And finally, we should all sit up and listen to Jackie Jones, an Army lieutenant, when she says, "If we let him get away with this, who knows what's going to be next?" 
I have called upon Hollywood and Walter and J.P. and Jackie and all their courageous comrades-in-arms to do what must be done. Tonight, America and the world are deeply grateful to them and to their families. And let me say to everyone listening or watching tonight: When the troops we've sent in finish their work, I am determined to bring them home as soon as possible. 
Tonight, as our forces fight, they and their families are in our prayers. May God bless each and every one of them, and the coalition forces at our side in the Gulf, and may He continue to bless our nation, the United States of America

Exchange With Reporters on the Persian Gulf Conflict
January 17, 1991
The President. Well, again, I don't want to go into questions here because of the moment. I will say that was covered very well by Secretary Cheney and Colin Powell. And the way we're going to handle this is, I will not be commenting on the ups and downs -- and there will be some downs -- or the trauma of the moment -- there's a lot of trauma of the moment. But I think it is fair to say -- and I will be repeating this to the leaders here -- that we are pleased with the way things have gone so far. We're determined to finish what we've set out to do. But I just think, for procedural reasons, I'd like you all to know that I'm not going to be trying to do briefings from the White House on the details of the operations over there. I have full confidence in our Secretary of Defense and in our able Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and, of course, in our general, General Schwarzkopf. 
So, for the future, though I'll be in touch with the American people, I think it's better to leave the details of the operations to the briefings over there. And, of course, I'll be available for questions from time to time. But when we don't have all the information, I just would hate to risk misleading the American people. 
Having said that, I think all of us are very pleased that so far the operation is going forward with great success. And we keep praying that the loss of life will be held at an absolute minimum. And I feel so strongly about our troops over there. Certainly I feel that way about them, and I feel that way about the innocents who might get caught up in this conflict. So, I think it's fair to say there's a lot of prayer going on both here and on Capitol Hill and across this whole country. And it will be that way until this is concluded. 
The President. No, I'm not concerned. There is no unwarranted optimism, and there will be none. And I would refer you to the briefing of the Secretary of Defense and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. 

The President's News Conference on the Persian Gulf Conflict
January 18, 1991

We're now some 37 hours into Operation Desert Storm and the liberation of Kuwait, and so far, so good. U.S. and coalition military forces have performed bravely, professionally, and effectively. It is important, however, to keep in mind two things: First, this effort will take some time. Saddam Hussein has devoted nearly all of Iraq's resources for a decade to building up this powerful military machine. We can't expect to overcome it overnight -- especially as we want to minimize casualties to the U.S. and coalition forces and to minimize any harm done to innocent civilians. 
Second, we must be realistic. There will be losses. There will be obstacles along the way. War is never cheap or easy. And I said this only because I am somewhat concerned about the initial euphoria in some of the reports and reactions to the first day's developments. No one should doubt or question the ultimate success, because we will prevail. But I don't want to see us get overly euphoric about all of this. 
Our goals have not changed. What we seek is the same as what the international community seeks -- namely, Iraq's complete and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait and then full compliance with the Security Council resolutions. 
I also want to say how outraged I am by Iraq's latest act of aggression -- in this case, against Israel. Once again, we see that no neighbor of Iraq is safe. I want to state here publicly how much I appreciated Israel's restraint from the outset, really from the very beginning of this crisis. Prime Minister Shamir and his government have shown great understanding for the interests of the United States and the interests of others involved in this coalition. 
The President. I think that we ought to guard against anything that can change the course of the war. So, I think everybody realizes what Saddam Hussein was trying to do -- to change the course of the war, to weaken the coalition. And he's going to fail. I want to say when the Soviet Union made such a strong statement, that was very reassuring. We are in close touch with our coalition partners, and this coalition is not going to fall apart. I'm convinced of that. 
The President. Against a country that's innocent and is not involved in it -- that's what I'm saying. Israel is not a participant. Israel is not a combatant. And this man has elected to launch a terroristic attack against the population centers in Israel with no military design whatsoever. And that's why. And it is an outrage, and the whole world knows it, and most of the countries in the world are speaking out against it. There can be no -- no -- consideration of this in anything other than condemnation. 
The President. Oh, excuse me. The world is united, I think, in seeing that these United Nations resolutions are fulfilled. Everybody would like to find a way to end the fighting. But it's not going to end until there is total cooperation with and fulfillment of these U.N. resolutions. This man is not going to pull a victory off by trying to wage terrorist attacks against a country that is not a participant in all of this, and I'm talking about Israel. 
The President. Well, a lot of diplomacy has gone on behind the scenes in this regard, and I feel very confident about what I've said. 
The President. We're not targeting any individual. 
The President. No, I don't think there is any conclusion that he has a lot more staying power than anybody thought. But what I am cautioning against is a mood of euphoria that existed around here yesterday because things went very, very well -- from a military standpoint, exceptionally well. This was received all around the world with joy, but I just would caution again that it isn't going to be that easy all the time. But we have not changed our assessment as to how difficult the task ahead is. 
The President. Well, I don't know. But my thoughts are that as each hour goes by, they're going to be relatively less able to respond. And I say that with no bravado. I just simply say that because that's what's happening over there. 
So, he may well have been holding his mobile missiles back, for example -- wheeling them out there when he thinks they will be undetected and then firing a few of these missiles into the heart of downtown Haifa to try to make some political statement. But there may be some more of that ahead for -- maybe aimed at other countries. Who knows? But in terms of his ability to respond militarily, I can guarantee the world that, as every hour goes by, he is going to be less able to respond, less able to stand up against the entire world -- the world opinion as expressed in these United Nations resolutions. 
The President. I'd have to refer that to the -- well, I would expect there is a threat because chemical weapons have been dispersed. He's used them on his own people. And that's something that our troops have been warned against, the people of Israel have been warned against, obviously, and others in the area have been warned against. So I can't say that every chemical weapon has been destroyed. But I think I said the other night in the speech from -- comments from the Oval Office there that his ability to make chemical weapons will not exist. I can't tell you exactly where that stands, but I would refer you to the Pentagon. 
But there are countries involved there that may have leaned -- tilted, to use an old diplomatic expression, towards Saddam Hussein and towards Iraq that will clearly be in the forefront of this new world order. I am not going to write off Jordan. We've had a long-standing relationship with King Hussein, but he's in a very difficult position there. I have had some differences with him, but they've been respectful, but I would like to see him be more publicly understanding of what it is the United Nations is trying to do here and the United States role. We're not going to suggest that Jordan, because they've taken this position, can't continue to be a tremendously important country in this new world order. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat of Mongolia
January 23, 1991

In addition to these matters of mutual interest, I reviewed with President Ochirbat world affairs of surpassing concern, including Operation Desert Storm. Mongolia was among the very first to condemn Iraq's brutal invasion of Kuwait and to callfor Iraq's complete and unconditional withdrawal. Mr. President, after our talks, I know that you believe as I do that no nation must be permitted to assault and brutalize its neighbor. The action of Iraq's dictator -- the actions of one misguided man -- cannot obscure mankind's bright destiny of democracy and freedom. The future lies with the process of revolution and renewal now taking place in your nation -- a democratic revolution that is destined to bring peace, freedom and prosperity to the people of Mongolia, as it has to this country and so many others around the world.


Remarks to the Reserve Officers Association
January 23, 1991

Those American Reservists are part of an allied force standing against the forces of aggression -- standing up for what is right. They serve alongside hundreds of thousands of soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and coastguardsmen of 27 other nations -- all united against the aggression of Saddam Hussein. 
As we meet right here tonight, we are exactly 1 week into Operation Desert Storm. But it is important to date this conflict not from January 16th, but from its true beginning: the assault of August 2d, Iraq's unprovoked aggression against the tiny nation of Kuwait. We did not begin a war 7 days ago. Rather, we began to end a war -- to right a wrong that the world simply could not ignore. 
From the day Saddam's forces first crossed into Kuwait, it was clear that this aggression required a swift response from our nation and the world community. What was, and is, at stake is not simply our energy or economic security and the stability of a vital region but the prospects for peace in the post-cold-war era -- the promise of a new world order based upon the rule of law. 
America was not alone in confronting Saddam. No less than 12 resolutions of the United Nations Security Council condemned the invasion, demanding Iraq's withdrawal without condition and without delay. The United Nations put in place sanctions to prevent Iraq from reaping any reward from its outlaw act. Countries from six continents sent forces to the Gulf to demonstrate the will of the world community that Saddam's aggression would not stand. 
Appeasement -- peace at any price -- was never an answer. Turning a blind eye to Saddam's aggression would not have avoided war; it would only have delayed the world's day of reckoning, postponing what ultimately would have been a far more dangerous, a far more costly conflict. 
Unfortunately, in spite of more than 5 months of sustained diplomatic efforts by the Arab League, the European Community, the United States, and the United Nations, Saddam Hussein met every overture of peace with open contempt. In the end, despite the world's prayers for peace, Saddam brought war upon himself. 
Tonight, after 1 week of allied operations, I am pleased to report that Operation Desert Storm is right on schedule. We have dealt -- and I salute General McPeak and the airmen flying under the United Command out there, from the Navy and the Marines, as well as, of course, the Air Force; I salute him -- we dealt a severe setback to Saddam's nuclear ambitions. Our pinpoint attacks have put Saddam out of the nuclear bomb-building business for a long time to come. Allied aircraft enjoy air superiority, and we are using that superiority to systematically deprive Saddam of his ability to wage war effectively. 
We are knocking out many of their key airfields. We're hitting their early warning radars with great success. We are severely degrading their air defenses. The main danger to allied aircraft now comes from some 20,000 antiaircraft guns in the Baghdad area alone. And let me say, I am proud of the way our aviators are carrying out their tasks. In head-to-head combat, our jet fighters have destroyed 19 Iraqi jets. And they have hit, at most, one American jet in aerial combat. 
Step by step, we are making progress towards the objectives that have guided the world's response since August 2d: the liberation of Kuwait and the restoration of stability and security in the Gulf. And there can be no doubt: Operation Desert Storm is working. There can be no pause now that Saddam has forced the world into war. We will staythecourse -- and we will succeed -- all the way. 
As I said on the 3d day of this campaign, war is never cheap or easy. There will be problems. There will be setbacks. There will be more sacrifices. But let me say I have every reason to be very pleased with our progress to date. 
Saddam has sickened the world with his use of Scud missiles -- those inaccurate bombs that indiscriminately strike cities and innocent civilians in both Israel and Saudi Arabia. These weapons are nothing more than tools of terror, and they do nothing but strengthen ourresolve to act against a dictator unmoved by human decency. 
Prime Minister John Major of the United Kingdom said it well yesterday. "Saddam," he said, "may yet become a target of his own people. It is perfectly clear that this man is amoral. He takes hostages, he attacks population centers, he threatens prisoners. He's a man without pity, and whatever his fate may be," said Prime Minister Major, "I, for one, will not weep for him." No one should weep for this tyrant when he is brought to justice -- no one, anywhere in the world. 
I watched, along with all of you, that repulsive parade of American airmen on Iraqi television -- one more proof of the savagery of Saddam. But I knew as they read their prepared statements criticizing this country that those were false words forced on them by their captors. I saw one of General McPeak's kids -- one American pilot yesterday was asked why he was sure the pilots were coerced, their statements false. And he said, "I know that because these guys are Americans." He could well have said the same thing about the other pilots being held -- from Britain, Italy, and Kuwait -- all men of courage and valor, too. 
Tonight, I repeat my pledge to you and to all Americans: This will not be another Vietnam. Never again will our Armed Forces be sent out to do a job with one hand tied behind their back. They will continue to have the support they need to get the job done, get it done quickly, and with as little loss of life as possible. And that support is not just military, but moral -- measured in the support our servicemen and women receive from every one of us here at home. When the brave men and women of Desert Storm return home, they will return to the love and respect of a grateful nation. And with that in mind, I'd like to say to every family of every man or woman serving overseas: We're thinking of you, and you are in our prayers. 
And that is where I will close -- with the aim of protecting American lives and seeing the heroes of Desert Storm return home safe and sound. All life is precious, whether it's the life of an American pilot or an Iraqi child. And yet, if life is precious, so, too, are the living principles of liberty and peace -- principles that all Americans cherish above all others, principles that you and your comrades on duty tonight have pledged to defend.


Remarks on the Nomination of Edward R. Madigan To Be Secretary of Agriculture and a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters
January 25, 1991

The President. Well, there's a lot of activity going on right now trying to figure out what the best course of action is to clean this mess up, to stop this spill. 
Saddam Hussein continues to amaze the world. First he uses these Scud missiles that have no military value whatsoever. Then he uses the lives of prisoners of war, parading them and threatening to use them as shields; obviously, they have been brutalized. And now he resorts to enormous environmental damage in terms of turning loose a lot of oil. No military advantage to him whatsoever in this. It's not going to help him at all -- -- 
The President. Absolutely not. It has nothing to do with that. And so, I don't know. I mean, he clearly is outraging the world. But back to your question, there were some meetings that were concluded about 2 hours ago. A course of action that I will not comment -- I think is close to agreement. I'm not going to comment on what it is, but I can assure you that every effort will be made to try to stop this continuing spill into the Gulf and also to stop what has been done from moving further south. It's a little hard to do when the man has taken over this other country, Kuwait, and is using their assets in this way. But we will try hard, and you can be rest assured that the scientists and the oil people, the military are all involved -- the Saudis and the Kuwaitis and the U.S. side -- all involved in the closest consultation. 
The President. No, I'm speaking of what we do about this spill right now. We'll get to that later. 
The President. No, I'm staying with our objectives. And the violation of the Geneva conventions are clear, and we'll have to see how that works out. We'll have to see what a post-liberation Kuwait looks like there in Iraq. But our objectives remain the same, Terry [Terence Hunt, Associated Press]. 
The President. No, I haven't reached that conclusion at all, because these Scud missile attacks certainly invite instant retaliation if you can find the mobile launchers. And we're keeping on in that quest, as I indicated the other day. 
The President. I think what he's trying to do is to rally support in some of the countries where he may have some. I think he's trying with the attacks on Israel to divide the coalition and to mount anti-Israel sentiment in parts of the world. 
What he is doing with -- when you dump oil reserves out, unless he's trying to show how tough he will be for Saudi Arabia or something like that, I can't figure out. What he's doing when he brutally parades American prisoners, I can't figure that out either -- or British prisoners, or an Italian airman. But it is not a performance that is winning him any points anywhere in my view. 
The President. Hey, there's no embarrassment in that. It took 6 or 7 days, but there wasn't any embarrassment. I felt no embarrassment at all. There was a man who was wanted for crimes in this country, and he's in prison, and he's going to have his day in court. So, I would like to argue with the predicate a little bit because there wasn't any embarrassment. But we've set our objectives. Our coalition partners are in accord with these objectives, and we will stay with these objectives. 
The President. Because we've set our objectives. We've got our objectives in accord with the coalition, and we'll stay with them -- that's why. 
The President. We are certainly dealing with that all the time and we want to find ways to stop it. We want to find ways to stop these brutal, senseless, nonmilitary-value attacks on civilian populations. 
The President. Because we are not in the business of targeting Saddam Hussein. I've set out our goals, and I think that -- I will say this, as I said the other day in echoing my support for what Prime Minister Major of the United Kingdom said, no one will weep when he's gone. But having said that, we have spelled out our objectives and I will stay with them. 
But who knows what would happen if he left today? I would liketothink that what I have said over and over again would resonate in Iraq, and that is that we have no argument with the people of Iraq. We don't want to see a destabilized Iraq when this is all over. But we also don't want to see a continuation of this aggression. We will not tolerate a continuation of this brutality. And so we have a mix of problems. But the problems are not with the people in the streets of Baghdad. 
I admit he does irrational things. This thing today troubles me very much because there's no rationality to it. It looks desperate. It looks last gasp. It doesn't measure up to any military doctrine of any kind. But it's kind of sick. And yet, we are not going to be held captive to this kind of outrageous expression; nor will we be to the bombing of population centers or the brutal parading of American prisoners. And, boy, that one has hit me right square in the heart, I'll tell you. It's just outrageous what he's done. 


Remarks at the Annual Convention of the National Religious Broadcasters
January 28, 1991
Nowhere is this more true than in the Persian Gulf where -- despite protestations of Saddam Hussein -- it is not Iraq against the United States, it's the regime of Saddam Hussein against the rest of the world. Saddam tried to cast this conflict as a religious war, but it has nothing to do with religion per se. It has, on the other hand, everything to do with what religion embodies: good versus evil, right versus wrong, human dignity and freedom versus tyranny and oppression. The war in the Gulf is not a Christian war, a Jewish war, or a Moslem war; it is a just war. And it is a war with which good will prevail. 
The first principle of a just war is that it support a just cause. Our cause could not be more noble. We seek Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait -- completely, immediately, and without condition; the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate government; and the security and stability of the Gulf. We will see that Kuwait once again is free, that the nightmare of Iraq's occupation has ended, and that naked aggression will not be rewarded. 
We seek nothing for ourselves. As I have said, U.S. forces will leave as soon as their mission is over, as soon as they are no longer needed or desired. And let me add, we do not seek the destruction of Iraq. We have respect for the people of Iraq, for the importance of Iraq in the region. We do not want a country so destabilized that Iraq itself could be a target for aggression. 
But a just war must also be declared by legitimate authority. Operation Desert Storm is supported by unprecedented United Nations solidarity; the principle of collective self-defense; 12 Security Council resolutions; and in the Gulf, 28 nations from 6 continents united, resolute that we will not waver and that Saddam's aggression will not stand. 
I salute the aid -- economic and military -- from countries who have joined in this unprecedented effort, whose courage and sacrifice have inspired the world. We're not going it alone, but believe me, we are going to see it through. 
Every war -- every war -- is fought for a reason. But a just war is fought for theright reasons, for moral, not selfish reasons. Let me take a moment to tell you a story, a tragic story, about a family whose two sons, 18 and 19, reportedly refused to lower the Kuwaiti flag in front of their home. For this crime, they were executed by the Iraqis. Then, unbelievably, their parents were asked to pay the price of the bullets used to kill them. 
Some ask whether it's moral to use force to stop the rape, the pillage, the plunder of Kuwait. And my answer: Extraordinary diplomatic efforts having been exhausted to resolve the matter peacefully, then the use of force is moral. 
A just war must be a last resort. As I have often said, we did not want war. But you all know the verse from Ecclesiastes -- there is "a time for peace, a time for war." From August 2d, 1990 -- last summer, August 2d -- to January 15, 1991 -- 166 days -- we tried to resolve this conflict. Secretary of State Jim Baker made an extraordinary effort to achieve peace: more than 200 meetings with foreign dignitaries; 10 diplomatic missions; 6 congressional appearances; over 103,000 miles traveled to talk with, among others, members of the United Nations, the Arab League, and the European Community. And sadly, Saddam Hussein rejected out of hand every overture made by the United States and by other countries as well. He made this just war an inevitable war. 
We all know that war never comes easy or cheap. War is never without the loss of innocent life. And that is war's greatest tragedy. But when a war must be fought for the greater good, it is our gravest obligation to conduct a war in proportion to the threat. And that is why we mustact reasonably, humanely, and make every effort possible to keep casualties to a minimum. And we've done so. I'm very proud of our military in achieving this end. 
From the very first day of the war, the allies have waged war against Saddam's military. We are doing everything possible, believe me, to avoid hurting the innocent. Saddam's response: wanton, barbaric bombing of civilian areas. America and her allies value life. We pray that Saddam Hussein will see reason. To date, his indiscriminate use of those Scud missiles -- nothing more than weapons of terror, they can offer no military advantage -- weapons of terror -- it outraged the world what he has done. 
The price of war is always high. And so, it must never, ever, be undertaken without total commitment to a successful outcome. It is only justified when victory can be achieved. I have pledged that this will not be another Vietnam. And let me reassure you here today, it won't be another Vietnam. 
We are fortunate, we are very fortunate, to have in this crisis the finest armed forces ever assembled, an all-volunteer force, joined by courageous allies. And we will prevail because we have the finest soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines, and coastguardsmen that any nation has ever had. 
But above all, we will prevail because of the support of the American people, armed with a trust in God and in the principles that make men free -- people like each of you in this room. I salute Voice of Hope's live radio programming for U.S. and allied troops in the Gulf, and your Operation Desert Prayer, and worship services for our troops held by, among others, the man who over a week ago led a wonderful prayer service at Fort Myer over here across the river in Virginia, the Reverend Billy Graham. 
But with the support and prayers of so many, there can be no question in the minds of our soldiers or in the minds of our enemy about what Americans think. We know that this is a just war. And we know that, God willing, this is a war we will win. But most of all, we know that ours would not be the land of the free if it were not also the home of the brave. No one wanted war less than I did. No one is more determined to seize from battle the real peace that can offer hope, that can create a new world order. 
When this war is over, the United States, its credibility and its reliability restored, will have a key leadership role in helping to bring peace to the rest of the Middle East. And I have been honored to serve as President of this great nation for 2 years now and believe more than ever that one cannot be America's President without trust in God. I cannot imagine a world, a life, without the presence of the One through whom all things are possible. 


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 29, 1991

I come to this House of the people to speak to you and all Americans, certain that we stand at a defining hour. Halfway around the world, we are engaged in a great struggle in the skies and on the seas and sands. We know why we're there: We are Americans, part of something larger than ourselves. For two centuries, we've done the hard work of freedom. And tonight, we lead the world in facing down a threat to decency and humanity. 
What is at stake is more than one small country; it is a big idea: a new world order, where diverse nations are drawn together in common cause to achieve the universal aspirations of mankind -- peace and security, freedom, and the rule of law. Such is a world worthy of our struggle and worthy of our children's future. 
The community of nations has resolutely gathered to condemn and repel lawless aggression. Saddam Hussein's unprovoked invasion -- his ruthless, systematic rape of a peaceful neighbor -- violated everything the community of nations holds dear. The world has said this aggression would not stand, and it will not stand. Together, we have resisted the trap of appeasement, cynicism, and isolation that gives temptation to tyrants. The world has answered Saddam's invasion with 12 United Nations resolutions, starting with a demand for Iraq's immediate and unconditional withdrawal, and backed up by forces from 28 countries of 6 continents. With few exceptions, the world now stands as one.


The war in the Gulf is not a war we wanted. We worked hard to avoid war. For more than 5 months we -- along with the Arab League, the European Community, the United Nations -- tried every diplomatic avenue. U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar; Presidents Gorbachev, Mitterrand, Ozal, Mubarak, and Bendjedid; Kings Fahd and Hassan; Prime Ministers Major and Andreotti -- just to name a few -- all worked for a solution. But time and again, Saddam Hussein flatly rejected the path of diplomacy and peace. 
The world well knows how this conflict began and when: It began on August 2d, when Saddam invaded and sacked a small, defenseless neighbor. And I am certain of how it will end. So that peace can prevail, we will prevail. [Applause] Thank you. 
Tonight I am pleased to report that we are on course. Iraq's capacity to sustain war is being destroyed. Our investment, our training, our planning -- all are paying off. Time will not be Saddam's salvation. 
Our purpose in the Persian Gulf remains constant: to drive Iraq out of Kuwait, to restore Kuwait's legitimate government, and to ensure the stability and security of this critical region. 
Let me make clear what I mean by the region's stability and security. We do not seek the destruction of Iraq, its culture, or its people. Rather, we seek an Iraq that uses its great resources not to destroy, not to serve the ambitions of a tyrant, but to build a better life for itself and its neighbors. We seek a Persian Gulf where conflict is no longer the rule, where the strong are neither tempted nor able to intimidate the weak. 
Most Americans know instinctively why we are in the Gulf. They know we had to stop Saddam now, not later. They know that this brutal dictator will do anything, will use any weapon, will commit any outrage, no matter how many innocents suffer. 
They know we must make sure that control of the world's oil resources does not fall into his hands, only to finance further aggression. They know that we need to build a new, enduring peace, based not on arms races and confrontation but on shared principles and the rule of law. 
And we all realize that our responsibility to be the catalyst for peace in the region does not end with the successful conclusion of this war.
But the world has to wonder what the dictator of Iraq is thinking. If he thinks that by targeting innocent civilians in Israel and Saudi Arabia, that he will gain advantage, he is dead wrong. If he thinks that he will advance his cause through tragic and despicable environmental terrorism, he is dead wrong. And if he thinks that by abusing the coalition prisoners of war he will benefit, he is dead wrong. 
We will succeed in the Gulf. And when we do, the world community will have sent an enduring warning to any dictator or despot, present or future, who contemplates outlaw aggression. 
The world can, therefore, seize this opportunity to fulfill the long-held promise of a new world order, where brutality will go unrewarded and aggression will meet collective resistance. 
Yes, the United States bears a major share of leadership in this effort. Among the nations of the world, only the United States of America has both the moral standing and the means to back it up. We're the only nation on this Earth that could assemble the forces of peace. This is the burden of leadership and the strength that has made America the beacon of freedom in a searching world. 
This nation has never found glory in war. Our people have never wanted to abandon the blessings of home and work for distant lands and deadly conflict. If we fight in anger, it is only because we have to fight at all. And all of us yearn for a world where we will never have to fight again. 
Each of us will measure within ourselves the value of this great struggle. Any cost in lives -- any cost -- is beyond our power to measure. But the cost of closing our eyes to aggression is beyond mankind's power to imagine. This we do know: Our cause is just; our cause is moral; our cause is right. 
Let future generations understand the burden and the blessings of freedom. Let them say we stood where duty required us to stand. Let them know that, together, we affirmed America and the world as a community of conscience. 
The winds of change are with us now. The forces of freedom are together, united. We move toward the next century more confident than ever that we have the will at home and abroad to do what must be done -- the hard work of freedom. 


Remarks at the National Prayer Breakfast
January 31, 1991

This is a diverse group. I've never seen anything quite like it -- politically or anything else. But we do have one thing in common: We stand together in prayer. Let me just share a letter -- a true letter I received here from a mother who told me a story about her 5-year-old son's evening prayers. As he knelt by his bed -- this kid was kneeling in prayer, and his parents explained that they were going to pray together for President Bush so that he would have the wisdom to get the hostages out of Iraq. And after a minute of deep thinking, the little boy said, "Mom, how is a bush going to get the people out of the rock, and how did they get there in the first place?" Well, the mother, in her wrap-up of the letter, said that it was a good thing the Lord knew what the boy was praying for, because he sure didn't. [Laughter] But, you know, the hostages came out of Iraq. [Laughter]


Remarks to Community Members at Cherry Point Marine Corps Air Station in North Carolina
February 1, 1991

It comes as little surprise that the first ground engagement in the Gulf involved marines. It comes as no surprise that the marines fought with great distinction and fought very bravely. Their professionalism and sacrifice will end the nightmare -- I'm absolutely confident of that -- will end the nightmare of Iraq's brutal occupation and ensure that Kuwait is once again free.

No, but their courage and commitment will help punish aggression and protect our new world order from the tyranny of ruthless dictators with no concern for human life. 
We're now more than 2 weeks into Operation Desert Storm. My report to you today is that we are on course, we are on schedule, and things go well. Day by day, night by night, Iraq's capacity to wage war is being systematically destroyed by U.S. and coalition military forces. And our investment, our training, and our planning are paying off. And yes, achieving our goals will require time and sacrifice, but we will prevail -- make no mistake about that. And when we do -- and when we do, we will have taught a dangerous tyrant and those few who would follow in his footsteps that there is no place for lawless aggression in this critical region and in the new world order that we seek to create. 


Remarks to Community Members at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in Goldsboro, North Carolina
February 1, 1991

You know, we're now more than 2 weeks into Desert Storm. And I'm happy to say -- and put it this way -- we are on course and we are on schedule. And as each day passes, Iraq's war machine, thanks to many of your loved ones, is being systematically destroyed by our allied military forces. Our investment, our training, and our planning are paying off. And yes, sacrifices still lay ahead, but we will succeed. And when we do, we will have taught Saddam Hussein and all others like him that there is no place for lawless aggression in the region or in this new world order that we envision. 
While I'm here, I would be remiss if I didn't salute what the U.S. and coalition airmen have accomplished. Air superiority is an established fact now. The Iraqi Air Force is no longer a factor. And I know that this base -- as much as any base in this country -- this base is very proud of the way that we have used air superiority to go after Saddam's missiles of terror. 
And yes, our mission in the Gulf is demanding and it's difficult, but I can tell you that our troops will not be asked to accomplish their mission with one hand tied behind their back. We are not going to do that in this war. And let me say something else: Your husbands and wives and your moms and dads will not be in that Gulf one day longer than is absolutely necessary. I want them home, and I want them all home. 

Remarks to Community Members at Fort Stewart, Georgia
February 1, 1991

Right now, it's night in Saudi Arabia. The soldiers from Fort Stewart are on duty, 1 more day in more than 5 long months away from home. Our thoughts are with them, day and night -- America's finest, standing against an aggressor who must be stopped, standing up for the best -- all that is best in us. Because those men and women know and you know -- we all know that when the forces of aggression take up arms, America cannot look the other way. 
It began with Kuwait, but that wouldn't have been the end. What we've witnessed these last few weeks removed any last shred of doubt about the adversary that we face: the terror bombing, without military value -- the terror bombing of innocent civilians with those Scud missiles; the brutal treatment -- that brutal, inhumane treatment of our POW's; the endless appetite for evil that would lead a man to make war on the world's environment. All of us know what we're up against. All of you know why we're there. 
We are there because we are Americans, part of something that's larger than ourselves. Our cause is right. Our cause is just. And because it is just, that world's cause will prevail. 
And when we win -- and we will -- we will have taught a dangerous dictator and any tyrant tempted to follow in his footsteps that the U.S. has a new credibility, and that what we say goes, and that there is no place for lawless aggression in the Persian Gulf and in this new world order that we seek to create. And we mean it. And he will understand that when the day is done. 
I know that all of you -- especially all of you -- are anxious to know if and when a ground operation might begin. Let me tell you now, it will only begin if necessary and when we decide that the time is right. We will conduct this conflict on our terms, on our timetable, not on Saddam Hussein's timetable. 
Let me assure you that Desert Storm is right on course. Our training, our investment, our planning are all paying off. American and allied forces are systematically destroying Iraq's capacity to wage war. 

The President's News Conference
February 5, 1991
This morning I also spoke with President Ozal of Turkey regarding the coalition efforts in the Persian Gulf. We're nearing the end of the third week of Operation Desert Storm -- almost 21 days to the hour. And I'm pleased to report that we remain on course and on schedule. 
U.S. and coalition forces continue to perform their assigned missions with great professionalism and, thankfully, with only modest casualties on our side. And I'd like to emphasize that we're going to extraordinary and, I would venture to say, unprecedented lengths to avoid damage to civilians and holy places. 
We do not seek Iraq's destruction, nor do we seek to punish the Iraqi people for the decisions and policies of their leaders. In addition, we are doing everything possible -- and with great success -- to minimize collateral damage, despite the fact that Saddam is now relocating some military functions such as command-and-control headquarters in civilian areas such as schools. 
I'd also emphasize that our goals have not changed. We continue to seek Iraq's full compliance with the 12 relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions. 
The President. No, that's not what we're doing. No, we are not trying to systematically destroy the functions of daily living in Iraq. That's not what we're trying to do -- or are we doing it. 
The President. Well, I would say that our effort, our main goal, is to get this man to comply with the resolutions. But we are not trying to systematically destroy the infrastructure or to destroy Iraq. For example, I can tell you about -- on targeting petroleum resources, we're not trying to wipe out all their ability to produce oil. We're not trying to wipe out all their ability to refine oil. We are trying to wipe out and keep them from resupplying their military machine. 
The President. Well, we'll have to just wait and see, Helen [Helen Thomas, United Press International]. That's a very complicated question. 
The President. But the war has been going on for something less than 21 days now, fully, and I think it is going very well, indeed. And so we will keep going, and I will avoid making -- -- 
The President. I will avoid making predictions as to when it will end, but it won't be -- I've said this over and over again -- it will not be a Vietnam. I don't believe it's going to be long and drawn-out. And it is going as we planned. It is going on schedule. It is going very well. 
The President. No, it doesn't signal that. 
Saddam Hussein will not set the timing for what comes next. We will do that. And I will have to make that decision if we go to ground forces, and I will do it upon serious consideration of the recommendations of our military, including our Secretary of Defense and the Chairman, of course, but also of our commanders in the field. 
The President. I don't think that there was an initial -- I don't think there is an Iranian proposal, John [John Cochran, NBC News]. I have not seen it. I just hung up talking to President Ozal of Turkey, and he doesn't think there is a specific Iranian proposal because -- and I think the reason is that people realize that this man has to comply with these resolutions without equivocation; that he has to go forward, no concession, no compromise, and do what the world has called on him to do. And at that point, then there can be some cessation of hostilities. But I have not seen a specific five-point program out of Tehran. 
 
The President. Let me stop you there if I could, and then I'll get back to your question. If that were the case, it would seem to me that Iran would have conveyed such a proposal to the United States, and that is not the case. 
The President. I see. No, I don't think that's the case, but the war will not end with Saddam Hussein standing with his view that he will not withdraw from Kuwait. I believe one of the things we'll see that came out of these recent meetings with the Iraqi Hadami [Sa`dun Hammadi, Deputy Prime Minister of Iraq] in Iran is that Iraq is showing no flexibility whatsoever in terms of withdrawing from Kuwait. So, we get right back to square one. There's nothing to negotiate about. There's nothing to be conciliatory about when you have a person who is steadfast in his refusal to comply with the fundamental purpose, and that is to get him out of Kuwait. But we haven't shifted our objectives on this. 
Now, would I weep? Would I mourn if somehow Saddam Hussein did not remain as head of his country? I thought Prime Minister Major spoke very well about it, spoke very convincingly about it, and he reflected my view that there will be no sorrow if he's not there. In fact, it would be a lot easier to see a successful conclusion because I don't believe anybody other than Saddam Hussein is going to want to continue to subject his army to the pounding they are taking, or his people to the pounding that is going on. So, I would liketothink that somehow, some way, that would happen. But I have no evidence that it will. 
The President. Well, I think one of the things that I look forward to hearing from General Powell and Dick Cheney is the answer to that question. And I guess you could rephrase it and say, would air power alone get the job done? My own view is I'm somewhat skeptical that it would, but I'm very interested to hear from our Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. 
The President. My reading is to refer to General Schwarzkopf and the Pentagon briefing on that, which I thought were very clear. And obviously, there were devastating losses on the Iraqi side -- no question about the amounts of armor that were killed and, regrettably, the loss of life. But there's no question that this was a humiliating defeat. But I'd rather leave the details of that to the Pentagon briefers or to the briefers out in Saudi Arabia -- who, incidentally, both of whom are doing a superb job of keeping the American people informed, keeping the world informed. And they have my full support for the way in which they're briefing. 
The President. I'm not sure he has the full -- I've never known for fact certain how much he's told. You mentioned Khafji -- the question was raised. I don't know how much information he has about what happened there in spite of the full coverage that takes place. But let me be very clear. What concerns me are the lives of our troops. What concerns me are the lives of our coalition forces, the Saudi and the Qatar forces that went into Khafji very courageously. And my first worries are about them. And Saddam Hussein should be concerned about the Iraqi forces. But how concerned he is, I don't know. Because when you shove people into battle, pushing them from behind to be defeated clearly and surely, or when you send your airplanes up and the score is totally one-sided -- in fact, every engagement in the air, the Iraqi planes and pilots have gone down -- you have to wonder how he looks at what you're asking about, how he feels about that. 
But here's a man that used chemical weapons on his own people. Here's a man that gassed the Kurds. Here's a man who has no hesitancy to recklessly throw city-busting Scuds, population-killing Scuds, into Israel or into Saudi Arabia. Here's a man that brutally parades prisoners of war. Here's a man that has launched environmental terrorism. I can't figure out what he's thinking, and neither do the coalition partners with whom I am in touch; neither can they figure it out. 
But we're going to pursue this to achieve our objectives. And clearly, I want those objectives achieved with the most limited loss of life possible. It works on my mind every day. And I want to be sure that we pursue our ends with that in mind. But we are going to prevail, and I'm going to do whateverisnecessary to be sure that we do and be sure we do it in relatively timely fashion. 
The President. I wouldn't be surprised if that's what he's trying to do. But I think that after the war, when we prevail -- and we will -- and when the coalition prevails -- and it will -- there will be a renewed credibility for the United States, a renewed credibility for the United Nations. And thus, I worry far less about that than about other things because I think we then have an enormous potential to join with others in being the peacemakers. 
So, the fact that Iran would like to see the war end is encouraging. And Iran is conducting itself, in my view, in a very credible way here. They've said that those airplanes that come in there are going to be impounded, and we take them at their word on that. They have not been violators of the sanctions that we're aware of. They have wanted to remain neutral. They are concerned about continued U.S. ground force presence in the Gulf, and I keep saying, not just to reassure Iran but to everybody else, we have no intention of leaving forces in that area. We are there as part of a coalition under the United Nations resolutions to get this job done. 
So, I have no argument with the way Iran is conducting itself. The only thing I was disputing with John a little is whether there was a specific peace proposal. And I don't think there is because I think Iran knows that Saddam has to comply fully with these resolutions and start a credible, visible withdrawal; then the new regime of legitimate leaders comes back to Kuwait. 
And that's the way it could end if Saddam could come to his senses. But I keep coming back to the point that in all these talks there is no indication that he is prepared to get out of Kuwait. It's always the bottom line. They talk and talk and talk -- and then, "But this is Province 19; we're going to stay there." 
The President. No, I haven't put it in terms of surrender; I've been putting it in terms of compliance with the resolutions. But I don't know. As I've said, it is very difficult to read somebody who is doing these horrible things that he is doing to civilian populations, to prisoners, to the environment, and to many other things. So, I just can't predict it, but all I know is, we are going to prevail. The coalition will prevail. He will comply with the United Nations resolutions, and that means he will be totally out of Kuwait one way or another. But I don't know -- I can't give you a clear picture of exactly which way will achieve that result. 
The President. No. The one serious engagement on the ground forces is they've been obliterated. So, I haven't changed my view on it. But having said that, we will conduct ourselves in such a way as to minimize -- I mean, to see that the risk to coalition forces is minimum. And that is what I've asked our Chairman and our Secretary to do and to look into when they go out there. 
The President. Well, I think it's better to never say what option you may be considering or may or may not do. But, yes, he has used chemical weapons on his own people, so the only way I would like to take the opportunity in responding to your question to say he ought to think very carefully about doing that -- very, very carefully. And I will leave that up to a very fuzzy interpretation because I would like to have every possible chance that he decides not to do this. 
And you talk about turning world opinion further against this brutal man, that would do it. But how we will respond or something, I would wait for recommendations and I would not discuss options ahead of time one way or another. 
The President. I would simply say that I want to let this be determined by people that understand the military plan and that are prepared to implement it. And I remember before January 16th there was the same feeling -- please let the sanctions work. I mean, I can understand the feeling on the Hill. I can understand those who say let air power do it alone. 
But I'm going to make these calls. These are the responsibilities of the Commander in Chief -- that kind of decision. And I will make that decision after full consultation with the chief out there and the two main military people upon whom I depend here -- Secretary of Defense and Chairman of the Chiefs. 
So, I'm not trying to say it wouldn't be a difficult decision, but I am saying, one, I'm prepared to make it, and two, I have total confidence that this decision will not be recommended to me unless the people that I've just mentioned know that it's theright thing to do. 
The President. It would have to be a credible, visible, totally convincing withdrawal. There would be other things that I will not state here that I would want to see happen. That would mean immediate supervision of the withdrawal. It would mean a return of the legitimate government right away. And so, there are several things. But the reason I want to pull back a little and not give you a 10-point program is that he's got to say: I'm going to get out of Kuwait now, and I'm going to get out fast, and I'm going to do it so everybody knows that I'm not making this up, that I'm going to go forward. No trust, no concession -- "I'll get out if you'll get out" -- we've passed that. We tried that, diplomatic effort after diplomatic effort. 
Now we're in a war with this man. And he will comply with these resolutions fully, without concession. And then we can determine what niceties or what little details need to be done. But what has to happen to begin with is a credible withdrawal from Kuwait without concession, without condition. And all the rest of this then can fall into place. 

Exchange With Reporters Aboard Air Force One on the Persian Gulf Conflict
February 6, 1991

The President. Well, I'm afraid that we have a major disagreement on that. It's not true. 
The President. We just stay with the course here. There will be no cease-fire; there will be nothing of that nature until this man commences a credible unilateral withdrawal. And then we'll see what happens. But there's no interest in the other. I mean, there's talk about it, but most of the people I've talked to in that part of the world feel that Saddam simply has got it wrong and doesn't have the word on what he ought to do, so -- -- 
The President. I saw a notice about it. I don't think we've had official notice. I saw something in the paper about it. We have no people over there, so I don't know what he's proving by that. 


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Meeting of the Economic Club in New York, New York
February 6, 1991

This year, as Dick said, marks a defining hour -- a moment of truth -- for this generation, for this country, and I'd also add for the United Nations. We were patient and we were cautious. But when the moment of truth came, America and the world did what was moral, what was just, and what was right. 
We said the occupation of Kuwait would not stand. And 3 weeks ago tonight, at just about this time, we announced that the liberation of Kuwait had begun. Three weeks ago tonight, allied forces moved to end a conflict that we did not seek and that we did not begin. But ladies and gentlemen, it is one that we and our allies will finish. And I can tell you firmly that tonight we are on course and we are on schedule. Mission by mission, hour by hour, Iraq's capacity to wage war is being systematically destroyed by American and coalition forces. 
The road to real peace will be difficult -- long and tough, I'd say. But we will prevail. And when we do, we will have before us an historic opportunity. From the confluence of the Tigris and the Euphrates, where civilization began, civilized behavior can begin anew. We can build a better world and a better new world order. 
Against this background, the events of 1990 served to remind us that even a fundamentally healthy economy faces the risk of temporary disturbances, short-term setbacks. For example, when Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, it was a shock to the world's conscience. Business and consumer confidence fell. We all remember the rise, the dramatic rise, in oil prices. Inflation worries rose, and interest rates reflected an extra risk premium. Taken together, this produced a very real blow to an economy that had already slowed down. 
I am annoyed at the propaganda coming out of Baghdad about targeting civilians. This has been fantastically accurate. And that's because a lot of money went into high-technology weaponry -- these laser-guided bombs and a lot of other things, Stealth technology -- many of these technologies ridiculed in the past now coming into their own and saving lives, not only American lives, coalition lives but the lives of Iraqis.



Exchange With Reporters on the Persian Gulf Conflict Prior to Discussions With Defense Minister Thomas King of the United Kingdom
February 12, 1991

The President. I think there's a conscientious effort on his part to try to raise the propaganda value -- accusing us of indiscriminate bombing of civilians. And it's simply not true. And what's overlooked is the -- a lot of the brutality that's so evident and so purposeful on his part -- the treatment of the prisoners. The Scud missile attacks have no military value. The environmental terrorism has not taken human life yet, but it's pretty bad. And we are doing theright thing. And I'm just delighted with the cooperation. And we are on track. And I think most of the world knows it. But to hear this one-sided propaganda machine cranking out a lot of myths and falsehoods -- but I don't think the world is buying it, frankly. 
The President. No, I think we're right on track -- right on track and very proud to be identified with you all in this enterprise


Remarks to the American Association for the Advancement of Science
February 15, 1991

Before talking about the subject at hand, I do want to make a few comments on the statement that came out of Baghdad early this morning. When I first heard that statement, I must say I was happy that Saddam Hussein had seemed to realize that he must now withdraw unconditionally from Kuwait, in keeping with the relevant United Nations resolutions. 
Regrettably, the Iraq statement now appears to be a cruel hoax, dashing the hopes of the people in Iraq and, indeed, around the world. It seems that there was an immediate celebratory atmosphere in Baghdad after this statement. And this reflects, I think, the Iraqi people's desire to see the war end, a war the people of Iraq never sought. Not only was the Iraq statement full of unacceptable old conditions, but Saddam Hussein has added several new conditions. And we've been in touch with members of the coalition, and they recognize that there is nothing new here, with the possible exception of recognizing for the first time that Iraq must leave Kuwait. 
Let me state once again: They must withdraw without condition. There must be full implementation of all the Security Council resolutions. And there will be no linkage to other problems in the area. And the legitimate rulers of Kuwait must be returned to Kuwait. Until a massive withdrawal begins, with those Iraqi troops visibly leaving Kuwait, the coalition forces acting under United Nations Resolution 678 will continue their efforts to force compliance with all the resolutions of the United Nations. 
But there's another way for the bloodshed to stop. And that is for the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people to take matters into their own hands -- to force Saddam Hussein, the dictator, to step aside, and to comply with the United Nations resolutions and then rejoin the family of peace-loving nations. 
We have no argument with the people of Iraq. Our differences are with Iraq's brutal dictator. And the war, let me just assure you all, is going on schedule. Of course, all of us want to see the war ended soon and with a limited loss of life. And it can if Saddam Hussein would comply unconditionally with these U.N. resolutions and do now what he should have done long, long ago. 
So, I'm sorry that after analysis and reading the statements out of Baghdad in their entirety, there is nothing new here. It is a hoax. There are new demands added. And I feel very sorry for the people in Iraq. And I feel sorry for the families in this country who probably felt as I did this morning when they heard the television that maybe we really had a shot for peace today. 
But that's not the case. And we will continue. We will pursue our objectives with honor and decency. And we will not fail. 

Exchange With Reporters in Andover, Massachusetts, on the Iraqi Offer To Withdraw From Kuwait
February 15, 1991

The President. Oh, there's no evidence of any withdrawal. I mean, as I said down in Washington, it's a cruel ploy. What he did was reiterate some conditions and add some new ones. And it's totally unacceptable to everybody. 
You know, my heart goes out to the people in Iraq that you saw kind of jumping with joy early on, firing their weapons -- which is I guess their sign of joy -- in the air, and only to recognize when the fine print came out that it was a step backwards. 
So, there's no sign of any withdrawal. I wish there were; so did the whole world. 
The President. I don't know. It doesn't mean compliance with the United Nations resolutions. Until that happens, regrettably, there will not be a cessation of hostilities. There will be no pause, there will be no cease-fire, there will be no reliving experiences in the past that were unhelpful to a peaceful, satisfactory conclusion of the war. And so, there's nothing in this thing to offer hope. I wish I thought there was; there's not. 
The President. No, they're all -- the ones we've talked to are all solid and got on this thing the minute they saw the declaration coming out of Baghdad, pronounced it -- it was an initiative -- pronounced it dead on arrival because there wasn't anything new or significant. There was just some more conditions including asking the American taxpayer to pay for damage in Iraq. It's the other way around -- there -- reparation sanctions are called for under the United Nations. Reparations for Iraq -- undoes the damage that it's done to its neighbors. I don't know how you repay for the loss of human life in Kuwait, the brutality, the 15-to-20-year-old Kuwaitis just this last week. You can't make amends for that. 
But this was a cruel ploy. And the world saw it as such, including the coalition, which is just as solid today as it's ever been. 

Remarks to Raytheon Missile Systems Plant Employees in Andover, Massachusetts
February 15, 1991

Earlier today, maybe your hopes were lifted, maybe mine -- mine were -- and I think some hopes were lifted in downtown Baghdad with the statement. And I expressed, earlier on, regret that that Iraqi statement that first gave rise to hope in fact turned out to be a cruel hoax. Not only was the Iraqi statement full of unacceptable old conditions, Saddam Hussein has added several new conditions. 
Let me state once again: Iraq must withdraw without condition. There must be full implementation of all the Security Council resolutions. And there will be no linkage to other problems in the area. And the legitimate rulers, the legitimate government, must be returned to Kuwait. And until a credible withdrawal begins, with those Iraqi troops visibly leaving Kuwait, the coalition forces in compliance with United Nations Resolution 678 will continue their efforts to force compliance with all those resolutions, every single one of them. 
Compliance with the resolutions will instantly stop the bloodshed. And there's another way for the bloodshed to stop, and that is for the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people to take matters into their own hands and force Saddam Hussein, the dictator, to step aside, and then comply with the United Nations resolutions and rejoin the family of peace-loving nations. We have no argument with the people of Iraq. Our differences are with that brutal dictator in Baghdad. 
Everyone here has a friend or a neighbor, a son or daughter, or somebody he knows in the Gulf. And to you, let me say this, and to the American people: The war is going on schedule. Of course, all of us -- all of us -- want to see this war ended, the limited loss of life. And it can if Saddam Hussein would simply comply unconditionally with all the resolutions of the United Nations. But let me say this to you: I am going to stay with it, we are going to prevail, and our soldiers are going to come home with their heads high. 
Just days after Saddam Hussein took the offense against an undefended Kuwait, the people of this plant went into overdrive and took the offense. And since mid-August, it's been an around-the-clock effort, three shifts a day, 7 days a week. And I know many of you gave up your own Thanksgiving and Christmas even to be right here, to keep these lines moving. 
We know that this is a dangerous world. Today, our cold war concern about a large-scale nuclear exchange -- thank God it is more remote than at any point in the postwar era. At the same time, the number of nations acquiring the capability to build and deliver missiles of mass destruction -- chemical, even nuclear weapons -- is on the increase. In many cases, these missiles will be superior to Scuds, smaller, capable of flying farther and faster -- in short, more difficult targets. Between now and the year 2000, in spite of our best efforts to control proliferation, additional nations may acquire this deadly technology. And as we've been taught by Saddam Hussein, all it takes is one renegade regime, one ruler without regard for human decency, one brutal dictator who willfully targets innocent civilians. 
And so, when you all go home at night, you can say with pride that the success of Patriot is one important reason why Operation Desert Storm is on course and on schedule. And we're going to continue to fight this war on our terms, on our timetable, until our objectives are met. We will control the timing of this engagement, not Saddam Hussein. 
Make no mistake about it: Kuwait will be liberated. The people who build Patriot have every reason to be proud. Because of you, the world now knows that we can count on missile defenses. And because of you, a tyrant's threat to rain terror from the skies has been blunted; it's been cut short. And because of you -- and this one is special -- innocent civilians, priceless human lives, have been spared. 

Exchange With Reporters in Kennebunkport, Maine
February 17, 1991

So, that's what I learned today as I cleared my mind from concerns that all Americans have halfway around the world for this hour. Now I'll go back and do what I started off doing -- stay in touch with our key people and General Scowcroft, who is minding the store down there, Baker, Cheney, General Powell. And I can say having talked, checked in this morning, I think things are going well. I will repeat, they're on schedule, and we are determined to finish this job and do it right, fulfill what I've said are our objectives, with no concession, no pulling back. 
The American people are strongly in support not only of the troops but of these objectives. And, of course, that is a very important point because it is my hope that when this is over we will have kicked, for once and for all, the so-called Vietnam syndrome. And the country's pulling together, unlike any time -- in this kind of situation -- any time since World War II. And that's a good thing for our country. And that sends a strong signal for the future that we're credible, we're committed to peace, we're committed to justice, and we are determined to fulfill our obligations in trying to bring about a more peaceful world order. 
The President. Well, who knows? I mean, the only good news out of the statement that raised people's hopes and then dashed them -- the statement out of Baghdad -- the only good news out of that was, for the first time, they talked about withdrawal, and they did not reassert their position that Kuwait was Province 19. And that's positive. They should have done it on about the first week in August, and they should have got out. 
Because I am concerned about the suffering of innocents, and I'm talking about the innocents in Kuwait, too. Last week they had a bad week there according to the Amir, to whom I talked before I left for Maine. And he told me that his estimate was some 200 young people, 15 to 20, boys and girls, their bodies mutilated and all of them killed. So, we mourn for the innocents. And I've been mourning for the innocents in Kuwait since that invasion in August. And I hope we can get an end to that suffering very, very soon. I think we will. 
The President. I don't comment on anything to do with military. I've referred to those comments -- although the decision on ground forces will be made by me for U.N. forces. But I would simply not comment on that. It reminds me of "Saturday Night Live." Remember the questions they ask on "Saturday Night": "Hey, tell us how we can help the Iraqi soldiers the most," or "What is the password?" or "Please give me some information that will do in our troops." I mean, I'm not in that business -- come on. That was a wonderful piece. 
The President. The goals have been spelled out by me and by the coalition partners, and the goals remain the same. But I would answer like the Prime Minister: I wouldn't weep if they put him aside

Exchange With Reporters on the Soviet Peace Proposal for the Persian Gulf Conflict
February 19, 1991

The President. Let me just make one comment, and then I won't take any questions about it. But I do appreciate President Gorbachev's providing me a copy of his proposal -- of the Iraqi proposal, or his proposal to Iraq actually -- concerning the Gulf, the conflict there. And we provided last night comments to the Soviet Union. 
Let me just reiterate. As far as I'm concerned, there are nonegotiations. The goals have been set out. There will be no concessions -- not going to give. And so on his proposal, President Gorbachev asked that I keep the details of it confidential. And I'm going to do that. I will respect that request in the interest of thoroughly exploring the initiative. 
But, very candidly -- and I've been frank with him on this while expressing appreciation for his sending it to us -- it falls well short of what would be required. 
And I would leave it right there for now. 
The President. That means I'm going to leave it right there for now.

Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for Queen Margrethe II of Denmark
February 20, 1991

Your Majesty was born 1 week after Denmark was occupied in 1940. And you know that self-determination often carries a price. And so, it is no surprise that when the freedom of Kuwait came under attack, Denmark joined the multinational coalition. You knew that naked aggression must not stand. And today, a Danish warship, the Corvette Olfert Fischer, is deployed in the Gulf. 
You seek to strengthen the international community sanctions against the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. And today, also, Denmark is assisting the victims of war, sending a medical team to the coalition forces in Saudi Arabia, readying a hospital in Europe for evacuated casualties, helping refugees from Kuwait and Iraq.

Remarks on the Persian Gulf Conflict
February 22, 1991

The United States and its coalition allies arecommitted to enforcing the United Nations resolutions that callfor Saddam Hussein to immediately and unconditionally leave Kuwait. In view of the Soviet initiative which, very frankly, we appreciate, we want to set forth this morning the specific criteria that will ensure Saddam Hussein complies with the United Nations mandate. 
Within the last 24 hours alone we have heard a defiant, uncompromising address by Saddam Hussein, followed less than 10 hours later by a statement in Moscow that, on the face of it, appears more reasonable. I say "on the face of it" because the statement promised unconditional Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, only to set forth a number of conditions. And needless to say, any conditions would be unacceptable to the international coalition and would not be in compliance with the United Nations Security Council Resolution 660's demand for immediate and unconditional withdrawal. 
More importantly and more urgently, we learned this morning that Saddam has now launched a scorched-earth policy against Kuwait, anticipating perhaps that he will now be forced to leave. He is wantonly setting fires to and destroying the oil wells, the oil tanks, the export terminals, and other installations of that small country. Indeed, they're destroying the entire oil production system of Kuwait. At the same time that that Moscow press conference was going on and Iraq's Foreign Minister was talking peace, Saddam Hussein was launching Scud missiles. 
After examining the Moscow statement and discussing it with my senior advisers here late last evening and this morning, and after extensive consultation with our coalition partners, I have decided that the time has come to make public with specificity just exactly what is required of Iraq if a ground war is to be avoided. 
Most important, the coalition will give Saddam Hussein until noon Saturday to do what he must do: begin his immediate and unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait. We must hear publicly and authoritatively his acceptance of these terms. The statement to be released, as you will see, does just this and informs Saddam Hussein that he risks subjecting the Iraqi people to further hardship unless the Iraqi Government complies fully with the terms of the statement. 
We will put that statement out soon. It will be in considerable detail. And that's all I'll have to say about it right now.

Address to the Nation Announcing Allied Military Ground Action in the Persian Gulf
February 23, 1991

Good evening. Yesterday, after conferring with my senior national security advisers, and following extensive consultations with our coalition partners, Saddam Hussein was given one last chance -- set forth in very explicit terms -- to do what he should have done more than 6 months ago: withdraw from Kuwait without condition or further delay, and comply fully with the resolutions passed by the United Nations Security Council. 
Regrettably, the noon deadline passed without the agreement of the Government of Iraq to meet demands of United Nations Security Council Resolution 660, as set forth in the specific terms spelled out by the coalition to withdraw unconditionally from Kuwait. To the contrary, what we have seen is a redoubling of Saddam Hussein's efforts to destroy completely Kuwait and its people. 
I have therefore directed General Norman Schwarzkopf, in conjunction with coalition forces, to use all forces available including ground forces to eject the Iraqi army from Kuwait. Once again, this was a decision made only after extensive consultations within our coalition partnership. 
The liberation of Kuwait has now entered a final phase. I have complete confidence in the ability of the coalition forces swiftly and decisively to accomplish their mission. 
Tonight, as this coalition of countries seeks to do that which is right and just, I ask only that all of you stop what you are doing and say a prayer for all the coalition forces, and especially for our men and women in uniform who this very moment are risking their lives for their country and for all of us. 

Address to the Nation on the Iraqi Statement on Withdrawal From Kuwait
February 26, 1991

I have a brief statement to make today. Saddam's most recent speech is an outrage. He is not withdrawing. His defeated forces are retreating. He is trying to claim victory in the midst of a rout, and he is not voluntarily giving up Kuwait. He is trying to save the remnants of power and control in the Middle East by every means possible. And here, too, Saddam Hussein will fail. 
Saddam is not interested in peace but only to regroup and fight another day. And he does not renounce Iraq's claim to Kuwait. To the contrary, he makes clear that Iraq continues to claim Kuwait. Nor is there any evidence of remorse for Iraq's aggression or any indication that Saddam is prepared to accept the responsibility for the awful consequences of that aggression. 
He still does notaccept U.N. Security Council resolutions or the coalition terms of February 22, including the release of our POW's, all POW's, third-country detainees, and an end to the pathological destruction of Kuwait. The coalition will therefore continue to prosecute the war with undiminished intensity. 
As we announced last night, we will not attack unarmed soldiers in retreat. We have no choice but to consider retreating combat units as a threat and respond accordingly. Anything else would risk additional United States and coalition casualties. 
The best way to avoid further casualties on both sides is for the Iraqi soldiers to lay down their arms as nearly 30,000 Iraqis already have. Itistime for all Iraqi forces in the theater of operation, those occupying Kuwait, those supporting the occupation of Kuwait, to lay down their arms. And that will stop the bloodshed. 
From the beginning of the air operation nearly 6 weeks ago, I have said that our efforts are on course and on schedule. This morning I am very pleased to say that coalition efforts are ahead of schedule. The liberation of Kuwait is close at hand. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Cesar Gaviria Trujillo of Colombia
February 26, 1991

Well, our nations have seen the light. And our meeting today was just one more joint step in the direction of that light. I might add that we will always be grateful to Colombia for their role at the United Nations as we formulated common opposition to the forces of evil halfway around the world in the Gulf as we stood up to the aggressor, Iraq.


Address to the Nation on the Suspension of Allied Offensive Combat Operations in the Persian Gulf
February 27, 1991

Kuwait is liberated. Iraq's army is defeated. Our military objectives are met. Kuwait is once more in the hands of Kuwaitis, in control of their own destiny. We share in their joy, a joy tempered only by our compassion for their ordeal. 
Tonight the Kuwaiti flag once again flies above the capital of a free and sovereign nation. And the American flag flies above our Embassy. 
Seven months ago, America and the world drew a line in the sand. We declared that the aggression against Kuwait would not stand. And tonight, America and the world have kept their word. 
This is not a time of euphoria, certainly not a time to gloat. But it is a time of pride: pride in our troops; pride in the friends who stood with us in the crisis; pride in our nation and the people whose strength and resolve made victory quick, decisive, and just. And soon we will open wide our arms to welcome back home to America our magnificent fighting forces. 
No one country can claim this victory as its own. It was not only a victory for Kuwait but a victory for all the coalition partners. This is a victory for the United Nations, for all mankind, for the rule of law, and for what is right. 
After consulting with Secretary of Defense Cheney, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Powell, and our coalition partners, I am pleased to announce that at midnight tonight eastern standard time, exactly 100 hours since ground operations commenced and 6 weeks since the start of Desert Storm, all United States and coalition forces will suspend offensive combat operations. It is up to Iraq whether this suspension on the part of the coalition becomes a permanent cease-fire. 
Coalition political and military terms for a formal cease-fire include the following requirements: 
Iraq must release immediately all coalition prisoners of war, third country nationals, and the remains of all who have fallen. Iraq must release all Kuwaiti detainees. Iraq also must inform Kuwaiti authorities of the location and nature of all land and sea mines. Iraq must comply fully with all relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions. This includes a rescinding of Iraq's August decision to annex Kuwait and acceptance in principle of Iraq's responsibility to pay compensation for the loss, damage, and injury its aggression has caused. 
The coalition calls upon the Iraqi Government to designate military commanders to meet within 48 hours with their coalition counterparts at a place in the theater of operations to be specified to arrange for military aspects of the cease-fire. Further, I have asked Secretary of State Baker to request that the United Nations Security Council meet to formulate the necessary arrangements for this war to be ended. 
This suspension of offensive combat operations is contingent upon Iraq's not firing upon any coalition forces and not launching Scud missiles against any other country. If Iraq violates these terms, coalition forces will be free to resume military operations. 
At every opportunity, I have said to the people of Iraq that our quarrel was not with them but instead with their leadership and, above all, with Saddam Hussein. This remains the case. You, the people of Iraq, are not our enemy. We do not seek your destruction. We have treated your POW's with kindness. Coalition forces fought this war only as a last resort and look forward to the day when Iraq is led by people prepared to live in peace with their neighbors. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With Ambassador Nasir Al-Sabah of Kuwait
February 28, 1991

Let me -- I've violated my own rules of not taking -- I won't violate the question rule, but I do want to make just a comment, and then I'd welcome a comment from you. But before I say what's on my heart about Kuwait, I want to announce here today that the Iraqi Government has now agreed to designate military commanders to meet with coalition counterparts to arrange for the military aspects of this cease-fire, something we called for yesterday. 
They have come back now. We will promptly go back to them with the arrangements, where and when. It will be very soon. We will appoint high-level representatives from our military to meet with them. And obviously, the subjects will include -- it will be a wide array of subjects. The one that's amongst foremost in my heart is the question of our prisoners of war. And we expect a prompt repatriation of them, the Kuwaiti detainees, and others. 
The second subject, but the one that brings the Ambassador here, is a chance to tell him how pleased we Americans are that his country is free, and we're very pleased to have had a major role in it. 
The President. We're not going to get into that. These matters will all be discussed in appropriate forums. We've got a United Nations track, diplomatic track going forward, and we have the military track that will go forward. And so, I'll leave those matters to our experts to work out. 
The President. We will -- let's wait and see how these meetings unfold to what they've agreed to. They have met this one condition, which is very good, and they met it promptly, and that is that we are going to get together and send high-level military representatives. And we are going to get back our POW's, and we are going to do it fast. And we've got a few other matters of urgent concern that will be resolved fairly and in keeping with the determination that our fighting forces have showed. 
The President. Have not set a place yet. I really have told you about all I know about the logistics on it. But we're very pleased that it is going to go forward. And once again, it is a special day, and, Ambassador, I just can't tell you what's in my heart, but I am very pleased, very proud that your country is free. 


The President's News Conference on the Persian Gulf Conflict
March 1, 1991

The President. Good afternoon. In the hours since we suspended military operations in the Kuwaiti theater of war, considerable progress has been made in moving towards a cease-fire and postwar planning. As our forces moved into Kuwait City and as the faces of these jubilant Kuwaiti citizens have warmed our hearts, the coalition leaders started the arduous task of addressing the next stages of the Persian Gulf situation. 
In the meantime, we are focused on the many diplomatic tasks associated with ending this conflict. General Khalid, General Schwarzkopf, and other coalition military leaders of our forces in the Gulf will meet with representatives of Iraq tomorrow afternoon, March 2d, in the theater of operations to discuss the return of POW's and other military matters related to the cease-fire. We will not discuss the location of the meeting for obvious security reasons. But this is an important step in securing the victory that our forces have achieved. 
Work is proceeding in New York at the United Nations on the political aspects of ending the war. We've welcomed here in Washington this week the envoys of several of our close friends and allies. And shortly, Secretary Baker will be leaving for a new round of consultations that I am confident will advance planning for the war's aftermath. Again and as I said Wednesday evening, the true challenge before us will be securing the peace. 
The President. We are not targeting Saddam, and we have no claim on Iraqi territory. 
The President. No, I'm not going to say that. Not hunt him down, but nobody can be absolved from the responsibilities under international law on the war crimes aspect of that. 
The President. I think on the first question, the first part, I agree that the reports are just sickening that are coming out of Kuwait. We have been concerned about it. Early on in all of this I expressed the concerns that I felt. But I think we'll just have to wait and see because I think the persons that actually perpetrated the tortures and the insidious crimes will be the ones that are held responsible. Now, how you go about finding them -- but I think back to the end of World War II. That process took a long time to evolve, but justice was done. I can't say it was complete, can't say everybody that committed a war crime was tried. But it's a very complicated process. But the answer is, the people that did it. Now, a lot of them obviously took off and fled out of Kuwait. But some of the Kuwaitis know who they were, so we'll have to wait and see on that one. 
And what was the second part, Terry [Terence Hunt, Associated Press]? 
The President. On the question of security zone and arrangements out there, these matters will be discussed when Jim Baker is out there with the coalition partners. I don't believe they will be discussed at the military meeting tomorrow. 
The President. Well, I really, Brit [Brit Hume, ABC News], don't want to get into the hypothesis because I'm convinced they will. I really believe we will get satisfaction on that. And they know that they must comply, and I believe they will comply. And put it this way: They better comply. 
The President. Well, I've addressed myself to war crimes trials, and abuse of prisoners certainly is provided for. And you know, the Geneva convention cites how prisoners should be treated. I had not heard that report, and I don't want to leave it stand that I know of it or know of its accuracy. But it would be a horrible thing if that happened. 
The President. John [John Cochran, NBC News], I think that subsequent to your discussion with Secretary Baker, the Algerians denied this. I'm seeing General Scowcroft confirm that, that they have denied that. We don't really know about the stability inside. There are rumors, but that -- I think it's early. In my own view I've always said that it would be -- that the Iraqi people should put him aside, and that would facilitate the resolution of all these problems that exist and certainly would facilitate the acceptance of Iraq back into the family of peace-loving nations. 
The President. I would leave it stand that we cannot absolve anyone from his responsibility under international law. But that -- we were not approached on that at all. So the report is simply fallacious if it included that. 
The President. I would leave that matter to the international system of justice. And we cannot absolve somebody; I cannot wave a wand and absolve somebody from the responsibilities under international law. 
The President. Well, the question of third party nationals or Kuwaiti detainees will be presented both at the military meeting on the border, and it is being debated and presented as one of the demands in our Security Council resolution. I'm not sure that that matter will be resolved tomorrow, that part of it. But I hope that we see an undertaking by the Government of Iraq to do that which they should do, and that is to give full accounting and immediate repatriation of these people. I don't know whether they'll do it or not, but there will be, there must be, a full accounting. So we are going to be watching very carefully to see if they are responsive to these concerns. 
The President. No. We just want compliance with the resolutions and compliance with human decency, that is, to release those prisoners and release these that have been kidnaped. And of course, we want the perpetrators brought to justice. 
The President. Well, on the second one of the peace conference or the whole concept of trying to bring peace to the rest of the Middle East -- and I would say it relates to the Palestinian question; it relates to the Lebanese question. Clearly, it relates to how Iraq is brought back into the family of nations. All of those things are going to be discussed now with our coalition partners by Jim Baker. We are also discussing it, as I said, with those emissaries that have been here. 
In terms of rebuilding Iraq, my view is this: Iraq, had they been led differently, is basically a wealthy country. They are a significant oil producer. They get enormous income. But under Saddam Hussein and this Revolutionary Council, they have elected to put a tremendous amount of their treasure into arms. And they've threatened their neighbors. And now they invaded -- up to now had invaded a neighbor. 
And so, Iraq has a big reconstruction job to do. But I'll be honest with you: At this point I don't want to see one single dime of the United States taxpayers' money go into the reconstruction of Iraq. 
The President. Well, we'll give a little free advice. [Laughter] And the advice will be: Use this enormous oil resource that you have, further develop your oil resource and other natural resources, live peacefully, and use that enormous money to reconstruct and do the very questions you're asking about. And in addition to that, pay off these people that you have so badly damaged. They've got a big role ahead of them there. That's the way I look at it. 
The President. No, I think because of what has happened, we won't have to use U.S. forces around the world. I think when we say something that is objectively correct, like don't take over a neighbor or you're going to bear some responsibility, people are going to listen because I think out of all this will be a newfound -- put it this way, a reestablished credibility for the United States of America. 
So, I look at the opposite. I say that what our troops have done over there will not only enhance the peace but reduce the risk that their successors have to go into battle someplace. 
The President. You know, to be very honest with you, I haven't yet felt this wonderfully euphoric feeling that many of the American people feel. And I'm beginning to. I feel much better about it today than I did yesterday. But I think it's that I want to see an end. You mentioned World War II; there was a definitive end to that conflict. And now we have Saddam Hussein still there, the man that wreaked this havoc upon his neighbors. We have our prisoners still held. We have people unaccounted for. 
The President. No, because I'm getting there. And I'm not gloomy about it. I'm elated. But I just want to finish my job, my part of the job. And the troops have finished their part, in my view. They've done their job. They did it in 100 hours, those ground forces. And the Air Force was superb. And that's what the families sense. That's what the American people sense. But I still have a little bit of an unfinished agenda. 

Radio Address to United States Armed Forces Stationed in the Persian Gulf Region
March 2, 1991

Saddam Hussein's dreams of dominating the Middle East by the terror of a nuclear arsenal and an army of a million men threatened the future of our children and the entire world. And the world was faced with a simple choice: If international law and sanctions could not remove Saddam Hussein from Kuwait, then we had to free Kuwait from Saddam Hussein. 
The Iraqi Army was defeated. Forty-two divisions were put out of action. They lost 3,000 tanks, almost 2,000 armored vehicles, more than 2,000 artillery pieces. And over half a million Iraqi soldiers were captured, defeated, or disarmed. You were as good as advertised; you were, indeed, "Good to go." 
This is a war we did not seek and did not want. But Saddam Hussein turned a deaf ear to the voices of peace and reason. And when he began burning Kuwait to the ground and intensifying the murder of its people, the coalition faced a moral imperative to put a stop to the atrocities in Kuwait once and for all. Boldly, bravely, you did just that. And when the rubber met the road, you did it in just 6 weeks and 100 decisive hours. 
The evil Saddam has done can never be forgotten. But his power to attack his neighbors and threaten the peace of the region is today grievously reduced. He has been stripped of his capacity to project offensive military power. His regime is totally discredited, and as a threat to peace, the day of this dictator is over. And the bottom line is this: Kuwait's night of terror has ended. 
Thomas Jefferson said that the price of freedom is eternal vigilance. We must remain vigilant to make absolutely sure the Iraqi dictator is never, ever allowed to stoke the ashes of defeat into the burning embers of aggression. The sacrifice you've already made demands nothing less. The sacrifice of those who gave their lives will never be forgotten. 
Saddam made many mistakes. But one of the biggest was to underestimate the determination of the American people and the daring of our troops. We saw in the desert what Americans have learned through 215 years of history about the difference between democracy and dictatorship. Soldiers who fight for freedom are more committed than soldiers who fight because they are enslaved. 

Remarks to Veterans Service Organizations
March 4, 1991

Let me just begin by giving credit where credit is due. From the day that Saddam Hussein first invaded Kuwait, America's veterans stood rock-solid, rock-solid behind our troops. You understood from the very beginning what was at stake: the rule of law and the cause of freedom. You understand that when the forces of aggression arise, America must stand ready to do the hard work of freedom. 
I am pleased to say -- and you've seen it all in this age of instant television communication -- that we're making progress in our journey from war to peace. The cessation of combat operations that went into effect midnight Wednesday is, as you've heard from Dick Cheney, holding -- for the most part, it is holding. General Schwarzkopf has reported, and then the Secretary called me yesterday morning about this, that Sunday's desert meeting with the Iraqi commanders really made great progress. 
Already 10 coalition POW's, including several Americans, are on their way back home. But I'll tell you, I don't think any of us, particularly in this audience -- and I know I speak for the three up here behind me on this stage -- can relax at all until every single one of those prisoners is home and every single missing is accounted for to the best of the ability of the Iraqi forces, and also that the Kuwaiti detainees are returned -- every single one of them. And that's our goal. 
Our goal remains what it's been all along: Iraq's complete and unconditional compliance with all relevant United Nations resolutions and its implementation of all the requirements to be found in Security Council Resolution 686, passed overwhelmingly late Saturday afternoon, just this past Saturday. This would allow us to move beyond the current suspension of military operations to a more permanent and stable cease-fire. 
I am very grateful to our Secretary of Defense, to the commander of our -- to the Chairman of our Joint Chiefs, and to our CINC in the field, General Schwarzkopf, and to each and every one of them -- I expect, knowing some of you, that you took the same pride I did in one of our GI's when these Iraqis came tearing out to surrender. And they had fear written all over their faces because they'd been told that this would be their end. And I thought there was something very moving and touching when that American sergeant said, "We're not going to hurt you. We're not going to hurt you." 
And we are a generous nation. And we've got a lot to do now; we've got a lot to do to heal the wounds. Our argument has never been with the people of Iraq, with those hapless soldiers that were sent to a fate that they didn't even know what was in store for them. Our argument has been with Saddam Hussein. Our argument has been with a dictator who created aggression against a neighbor. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the Cessation of the Persian Gulf Conflict
March 6, 1991

From the moment Operation Desert Storm commenced on January 16th until the time the guns fell silent at midnight 1 week ago, this nation has watched its sons and daughters with pride, watched over them with prayer. As Commander in Chief, I can report to you our armed forces fought with honor and valor. And as President, I can report to the Nation aggression is defeated. The war is over. 
This is a victory for every country in the coalition, for the United Nations. A victory for unprecedented international cooperation and diplomacy, so well led by our Secretary of State, James Baker. It is a victory for the rule of law and for what is right. 
Tonight, I come to this House to speak about the world -- the world after war. The recent challenge could not have been clearer. Saddam Hussein was the villain; Kuwait, the victim. To the aid of this small country came nations from North America and Europe, from Asia and South America, from Africa and the Arab world, all united against aggression. Our uncommon coalition must now work in common purpose: to forge a future that should never again be held hostage to the darker side of human nature. 
Tonight in Iraq, Saddam walks amidst ruin. His war machine is crushed. His ability to threaten mass destruction is itself destroyed. His people have been lied to, denied the truth. And when his defeated legions come home, all Iraqis will see and feel the havoc he has wrought. And this I promise you: For all that Saddam has done to his own people, to the Kuwaitis, and to the entire world, Saddam and those around him are accountable. 
All of us grieve for the victims of war, for the people of Kuwait and the suffering that scars the soul of that proud nation. We grieve for all our fallen soldiers and their families, for all the innocents caught up in this conflict. And, yes, we grieve for the people of Iraq, a people who have never been our enemy. My hope is that one day we will once again welcome them as friends into the community of nations. Ourcommitment to peace in the Middle East does not end with the liberation of Kuwait. So, tonight let me outline four key challenges to be met. 
Second, we mustact to control the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the missiles used to deliver them. It would be tragic if the nations of the Middle East and Persian Gulf were now, in the wake of war, to embark on a new arms race. Iraq requires special vigilance. Until Iraq convinces the world of its peaceful intentions -- that its leaders will not use new revenues to rearm and rebuild its menacing war machine -- Iraq must not have access to the instruments of war. 
The war with Iraq is over. The quest for solutions to the problems in Lebanon, in the Arab-Israeli dispute, and in the Gulf must go forward with new vigor and determination. And I guarantee you: No one will work harder for a stable peace in the region than we will. 
Fourth, we must foster economic development for the sake of peace and progress. The Persian Gulf and Middle East form a region rich in natural resources with a wealth of untapped human potential. Resources once squandered on military might must be redirected to more peaceful ends. We are already addressing the immediate economic consequences of Iraq's aggression. Now, the challenge is to reach higher, to foster economic freedom and prosperity for all the people of the region. 
Now, we can see a new world coming into view. A world in which there is the very real prospect of a new world order. In the words of Winston Churchill, a world order in which "the principles of justice and fair play protect the weak against the strong. . . ." A world where the United Nations, freed from cold war stalemate, is poised to fulfill the historic vision of its founders. A world in which freedom and respect for human rights find a home among all nations. The Gulf war put this new world to its first test. And my fellow Americans, we passed that test. 
For the sake of our principles, for the sake of the Kuwaiti people, we stood our ground. Because the world would not look the other way, Ambassador al-Sabah, tonight Kuwait is free. And we're very happy about that. 
Tonight, as our troops begin to come home, let us recognize that the hard work of freedom still calls us forward. We've learned the hard lessons of history. The victory over Iraq was not waged as "a war to end all wars." Even the new world order cannot guarantee an era of perpetual peace. But enduring peace must be our mission. Our success in the Gulf will shape not only the new world order we seek but our mission here at home. 

Remarks Upon Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom to Margaret Thatcher
March 7, 1991

We will never forget her courage in helping forge a great coalition against the aggression which brutalized the Gulf. Nor will I forget one special phone conversation that I had with the Prime Minister. In the early days of the Gulf crisis -- I'm not sure you remember this one, Margaret -- in the early days of the Gulf crisis I called her to say that though we fully intended to interdict Iraqi shipping, we were going to let a single vessel heading for Oman enter port down at Yemen -- going around Oman down to Yemen -- let it enter port without being stopped. And she listened to my explanation, agreed with the decision, but then added these words of caution -- words that guided me through the Gulf crisis, words I'll never forget as long as I'm alive. "Remember, George," she said, "this is no time to go wobbly." [Laughter]


Interview With Middle Eastern Journalists
March 8, 1991

But in any event, those forces that did end up in the battle did very well. There were predictions that some might not want to engage in the battle, and they did, and so we are very grateful. And I keep saying two things: One, this is not a U.S. effort by itself. And secondly, our argument was never with the people of Iraq; it was with Saddam Hussein. 
I make this point because the Iraqis tried to make it them -- I mean "them" including all Arabs -- against the United States. And I will resist that until time immemorial, because there's a feeling of gratitude and affection to the Arab world because so many there stood with us against this evil. 
But now, look, I came to answer your questions, and I'll try to do so. Who wants to go first? 
The President. Roles for Iraq and Iran? Well, in the first place, we never have felt that it was in the interest of the Gulf or certainly of the United States to create a vacuum in Iraq. And we have not wanted an unstable Iraq. Iraq has a job to do of reconstruction. And what they ought to do is have a government that will signal to the rest of the world that they want to live within their own borders, that they are renouncing aggression. And indeed, they did renounce the annexation of what they used to arrogantly refer to as Province 19. 
So, they've got to send the signal to the world that they want to live within what we call the family of peace-loving nations. That is difficult, very candidly, for us. And one of the things Baker will talk about with our partners is whether it's difficult for them if Saddam Hussein remains in power. So, Iraq we want to see stable, living within its own borders with respect for its neighbors, renouncing its so-called claim to Kuwait, and yes, being an important part of the area. 
Iraq can be a very well-to-do country if they'd spend their money on helping their own people and not on arms and bullying the neighborhood, which they tried to do until they got into the war with Iran. Then the man changed his spots momentarily. Then when that war was over, he showed his arrogance and bullying again by going after Kuwait. 
So, the best answer, as we see it -- and again, with respect for our partners, I want to know exactly what they think but -- is for Iraq to live in its borders, and then it can regain the respect that they deserve. They've got a proud history. They've got culture. They've got religious traditions and all. So, we're open to that. But it's going to be difficult under the status quo. 
So, here's a chance now for our friends in the Arab world -- and there are many, and I hope there are more than when all this started -- to say, look, here's where we should carry the ball; here's the place we should have the lead. And then we stand there with our, I would say, conviction backed up by perhaps a naval presence that I mentioned coming up and down the Gulf. It has helped with stability. And I see it as that kind of partnership in the future, but with no rancor in my heart about Iran, no rancor about the people of Iraq. 
So, when I get up and say that here, I'm not just making it up. Because we hurt, we ache when we see a child that doesn't have enough food, or water that's contaminated, or something of that nature. And I think people in Saudi, Kuwait, Morocco -- they feel the same thing when they see an Iraqi child. 
So, that one is easier, it seems to me, the Gulf security including Iran and Iraq, than perhaps Lebanon and the Palestine question as it relates to Israel. 
So, their role in the security, at least for now, in my view, has been diminished because they bet on the wrong horse for the wrong reasons, the wrong motives. I mean, they did not stand up and condemn that aggression. And I think it has hurt some of the Palestinians in Kuwait who had been treated very well there. And then when the Kuwait thing happens, a lot of the Palestinians sided with the Iraqi invaders. Well, this didn't help their image around the United States. I can only speak for our country. 
But to try to justify aggression on the basis of the haves versus the have nots is unacceptable. And I don't think we can ever permit that kind of demagogic rationalization to justify the takeover of one country by another. And I, to be honest with you on that point, I had never considered Iraq a have-not country. I've considered them a country that has tremendous resources that they splurged on trying to buy support with Mercedes-Benzes and arming themselves to the teeth so that they could bully the neighborhood. Well, those days are over and I'm damn proud that we had a part, working with our partners, in putting an end to it. I say they're over. They better be over, or Iraq will not have normalized relations with this country. I can speak for the U.S. 
The President. What we're willing to do is immediately help in a humanitarian way. If there's a hungry child, if there's a sick family, we'll go there today; yesterday we'll be there. We've always done that. But as you look at the overall reconstruction of Iraq, what they need to do is come up with a plan where they use their wealth for their own reconstruction, and then be able to have a good life for their people from there on. They can do it. They've got enormous wealth. 
The President. One that is compassionate and concerned about his own people and drops all this arrogance about the neighborhood. That would be a good place to start. And I have known -- before the Iran-Iraq war I used to wrestle with these problems when I was at the United Nations. And these guys from other Arab countries have come up and told me this man's a bully. He'll walk into a room with other Arab leaders and swagger in with his -- bullying the neighbors. And he had muscle. He had arms, when some of them hadn't gone to the arms route. He had an arrogant swagger that tried to intimidate his Arab neighbors. 
Then he got into the Iran-Iraq war and that changed, because he needed help. So, he turned to those against whom he'd been arrogant and showed a different side momentarily. Then that war ended. And what does he do? He brutalizes Kuwait. So, he can't have that kind of an attitude if he wants reasonable relations with us. And that's what I'm saying. We tried with Iraq. We tried just before the end of the Iran-Iraq war to have better relations and to see a different side. And what happens? He takes over Kuwait, and that was it right there. Bang -- that's enough for us. 
And again, we're not the ones that are trying to dictate to that corner of the world. I've been out there. I have respect for the countries and their cultures and their traditions and for their sovereignty. And in this office, as long as I'm here, whether we have a big country or a small country, we are going to respect that. But I don't respect the bullying attitude that resulted now in the aggression against Kuwait. 
But I think the message, it shouldn't be one of recrimination: "Hey, we remember what you said; we're going to get even." It ought to be: "Look, we tried to stand for what we think was decent and right. We tried to stand with respect for principles in the Arab world. We tried in the targeting of Iraq to be respectful of their culture, archeological, religious, whatever." And our argument isn't with Islam; our argument isn't with Arabs. And I will stand up against any discrimination against Arabs in this country publicly, openly -- we've had groups in here -- and say, "Damn it, we hurt when you hurt." But what we stood for was something positive. And I want to keep trying in every way possible to get that message across. And it was a positive point about which many Arabs can rally. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada in Ottawa
March 13, 1991

The President. I think to say what I just said, you'd have to assume that there is some kind of change. I think it's fair to say there's some kind of change. The threat to some of the countries in the region is clearly down -- the threat from Iraq, which has been a major threat to several countries there. And that in itself is significant change and offers a better potential for peaceful arrangement.

The President. Yes, I'm concerned. I'm concerned about the instability. Neither the Canadians, nor the Americans, nor any other coalition partner wanted to see an unstable Iraq creating a vacuum in that part of the world. I'm not suggesting that is what is happening. But I'm concerned about it, and we are watching it with great interest. 
The President. I think Iran knows our view; in various ways they know our view that grabbing territory would be counterproductive. And I could take this opportunity to suggest that that would be the worst thing they could do. And I know that I would speak confidently for our coalition partners in the Gulf on that point. I'd let the Prime Minister speak for himself. 
On the question of Saddam, I have said over and over again that I think it's almost impossible -- put it this way -- is impossible to have normalized relations with Iraq while Saddam Hussein is in there. As the brutalities in Kuwait come out, as people see this environmental terrorism -- right, looking it in the face over there -- I think people are feeling more strongly than ever that what he has done in brutalizing that country and in the burnt, the scorched-earth policy, as he's violated every tenet of any concern for the environment, is beneath even contempt. 
So, it is hard to see how an Iraq with him at the helm can rejoin the family of peace-loving nations. And, of course, there is this U.N. sanction question of damages that has to be addressed. But as one assesses the damage in Kuwait, I think the blame has to be put right squarely on his shoulders. 
The President. May I clarify one thing, John [John Cochran, NBC News]? I'm a little nervous about my answer on Iran. I have no evidence that that's what Iran is trying to do. But as Iran has stated over and over again, their concerns about the U.S. keeping some permanent foothold in that part of the world -- I will say today that Iran must not and should not try to annex any of the territory of Iraq. 
The President. One, I'll restate my view that I want our troops to come home as soon as possible. I've just been elated as I've watched the troops come home and the warmth of the welcome and all of that. There are some details to be worked out on the cease-fire -- the return of all the prisoners, accounting for those who have not been accounted for. I must confess to some concern about the use of Iraqi helicopters in violation of what our understanding was. And that's one that has got to be resolved before we're going to have any permanence to any cease-fire. And so there are several details remaining out there. 
The President. Very much satisfied with the progress that has been made since General Schwarzkopf met in the tent, but there are still some very important things to be taken care of, including the fact that these helicopters should not be used for combat purposes inside Iraq.
The President. I've expressed my disappointment in the PLO. The PLO, you remember -- I believe it was at the Rabat summit years ago, was designated as the sole spokesman for the Palestinian people. But their leader chose wrong on this; went far beyond where he had to go in order to express his understanding about the dilemma that Iraq was in. Put it this way: he supported Saddam overly zealously and diminished his credibility -- not any further in the United States, necessarily, because it had gone way down when those terrorist vessels came along the coast of Israel. But he diminished his credibility in the Arab world. He diminished his credibility with the coalition partners.

I would liketothink that the diminished threat to Israel -- and it is significantly diminished because of what's happened in Iraq -- will be a reason that we will just not have ever-increasing arms sales


The President's News Conference With President Francois Mitterrand of France in Martinique, French West Indies
March 14, 1991

President Bush. I listened very carefully to that answer, and I agree with it. I mean, we are not in there trying to impose a solution inside Iraq. So, I would agree with the way President Mitterrand phrased that. I would only add that I am concerned and I expect he is, too, about the reports coming out of there. But what President Mitterrand said in the beginning is true: Nobody has all the information about what's going on there, who's trying to emerge. But he cited the coalition goals, and I agree with him. 
President Bush. Well, my answer on the helicopters is: That was not our understanding that they would be used to quash their own citizens. And I have nothing more to say to it, except all that does is make it very, very complicated in terms of bringing about a final cease-fire -- formalized, signed cease-fire. 
I don't think I said anything about what I'm going to do about troop dispositions in there, but clearly those troops are not going to be -- all of them out there until there's a cease-fire -- a formalized cease-fire. And I'd like to see -- and we talked about this a little bit today -- some peace-keeping arrangement. I want to get our troops home. I do not want to play into the hands of Iran and other countries that have suggested what we want is a permanent stationing of U.S. troops in the area. I want to bring them home. 
But I'd like to have some security arrangements in place. And all I'm saying is, using helicopters like this to put down one's own people does not add to the stability of the area and makes it very difficult. And besides -- I'll repeat -- it was not my understanding that they were going to use helicopters for this nature; it was represented that they were to be used for something else. 
President Bush. I don't see a good chance for a Korea-like situation. I am concerned about the instability inside of Iraq. But I think President Mitterrand put that very well when he said that was not an objective for us to dictate or control the situation in there. I think when you look back at how promptly Iraq came to that tent and then followed on with several of the requirements, I think that that's a reason to be optimistic. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister John Major of the United Kingdom in Hamilton, Bermuda
March 16, 1991

The President. No, I have learned long ago not to comment on something that I haven't heard or haven't authoritatively read, but there is dissension inside Iraq. That is a matter that we're not involved in. And I would simply repeat that Saddam's credibility remains at an all-time low ebb as far as the United States is concerned. 
The President. I do not. We are not -- that would be going beyond our mandate. Now, I will say this: that at the tent meeting, certain arrangements were made and certain ground rules spelled out -- British and U.S. commanders agreeing, the Saudis, all the coalition forces, agreeing and telling Iraq certain things should not happen. The movement of aircraft, for example. And so, they should not violate the conditions that they agreed to. 
But having said that, none of us want to move forces into Baghdad or to -- frankly, we don't want to have any more fighting. But they know what the ground rules are, and they ought to play by those rules, live by them. 
The President. I find it very difficult to see a situation under which we would have normalized relations with Saddam Hussein still in power. His credibility is zilch, zero, zed. And if he wants to talk about this, fine. But what people are looking for I think is compliance with -- fully compliance of United Nations resolutions. It is complying with the cease-fire terms. And I don't know what this speech is about; I simply can't comment on it. But if he's proclaiming that Iraq will be a democratic nation, fine. But that's -- I want to see -- the proof of that pudding is in the eating. 
The President. The only thing I could add to that, some arrangements for peacekeeping -- perhaps a role for the United Nations, perhaps a role for an Arab force. But there's a lot of details that have to follow. But the Prime Minister clicked off the major concerns that we have, and I would say, sir, that our coalition is united on this. 
The Prime Minister. I don't think we want to go into detail about that. We've made it fairly clear to the Iraqis what we expect them to do. I think we must wait for them to do it. It's our expectation that they both would and should. 
The President. We're notruling anything in or out. But we're making clear -- as General Schwarzkopf did, I think, just yesterday -- that they must abide by agreements made, and there are many agreements in the future that we haven't ironed out, many provisions in the future that we expect Iraq will comply with -- the Prime Minister having set out a very good litany right here. So, we're not trying to elevate the chance of further military action. When we said cease-fire, we ceased firing, and we want to see that formalized. And that's what we're approaching. And I won't go into any hypothesis on that. 

Remarks at the Community Welcome for Returning Troops in Sumter, South Carolina
March 17, 1991

And of course, the coalition victory in Kuwait would not have been possible without General Chuck Horner. Mary Jo, we are delighted that you're here with us today. Now stand up -- [applause]. You see, for those of you who didn't follow it -- and that's not many -- General Horner merged people and plane from 30 bases here in the United States, 6 Navy carriers, the Marines, and 9 allied nations into a seamless theater air force. And he mapped out the most intense, most successful air assault in history. And we are very grateful to him. You see, it was that powerful, precise air assault that helped coalition forces crush Saddam's war machine, while sparing innocent Iraqi citizens and while saving allied lives. Can you think of a better way to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Shaw Air Force Base than this? I can't. It is fantastic


Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony for the Elie Wiesel Foundation Humanitarian Award and an Exchange With Reporters
March 18, 1991

Iraq must pay reparations or pay damages. The more one looks at the environmental terrorism that they embraced, that they brought about, the more the world understands that they have got to do something about that. So how do you do it? Well, they are potentially a wealthy country. The trouble is they've taken all that wealth and spread it into weapons and then into aggression. And the aggression has been checked, but now we've got to see that they use their resources for helping their own people. And that's a little complicated, given the three areas of contest right now -- almost combat right now -- the south, up to the north, and then some in Baghdad itself


Remarks at the Gridiron Dinner
March 23, 1991

Some air war, wasn't it? I've just learned the three words every Iraqi pilot dreaded the most: Cleared for takeoff. [Laughter]


The President's News Conference With President Turgut Ozal of Turkey
March 23, 1991

President Bush. Well, we discussed that at length, and I would simply say that Saddam Hussein appears to still be calling the shots. And as I have said before, normal relations with the United States cannot be effected with Saddam Hussein still calling the shots, still in power. There are some interesting Cabinet shifts, but nothing that appears to depart from support for Saddam Hussein's policies

President Bush. Well, we're getting mixed reports. Not very much on what's happening in Baghdad. There's a tight net thrown over any possible coverage coming out of there. In the south, apparently the rebels are still fighting hard. I think Saddam Hussein made a claim that it was put down, but that is not correct. In the north, it's about the same thing. 
So, I think it's fair to say that there's enormous consternation and turmoil inside Iraq today. And we're playing no part in that. But it shows, I think, great unrest with the rule of Saddam Hussein. 
President Bush. Well, I don't think any -- I think it would be erroneous to suggest that there's a step-up from the outside, from the U.S. side, on the internal problems inside of Iraq. I don't believe that. In fact, its forces are there and will stay there until the cease-fire agreement is worked out. That's been stated from the very beginning. We stated from the very beginning that they ought not to fly their aircraft. And I think they've learned now not to fly the aircraft. I hope so. So, I would disabuse anyone of the view that there's stepping-up pressure at this point from the United States
President Bush. I don't think it's for us to try to see what will follow on in Iraq. All I've done is state that it will be very difficult for the United States -- in fact, I'd say at this juncture, impossible -- to have normalized relations with Iraq with Saddam Hussein in power. But I think it would be inappropriate to try to shape or suggest even what government should follow on. I would hope that it would be one that could work very compatibly with the Western powers, Western countries, and live happily ever after without threatening its neighbors. 
Now, the military side -- I am convinced that their ability to threaten their neighbors has been diminished, if not eliminated. And our general officers, Powell and Schwarzkopf, feel that the ability of the Iraqis to wage offensive war against their neighbors is gone. 
But what we're looking for is stability. We're not looking for disorder. And we're looking for somebody that is going to lead that country in the ways of peace and to take the enormous resources they have, pay off their obligations to others, and then raise the standard of living for their own people who have been in a war situation for too many years already. 
But beyond that, I don't think it would be appropriate for the United States -- I'll let President Ozal again comment on this -- to comment whether it ought to be a government controlled by one element or another. 
President Bush. I didn't have any discussions. Maybe others did. I did not. 
President Bush. Well, I'm not sure I do understand what Iran's role is in the south. And I'm not sure -- there have been some reports of people going across from Iran into southern Iraq. But I haven't seen an estimate on it. What was your second part? 
President Bush. That didn't surprise us at all. 
President Bush. Well, I think it would be better if everybody stayed out and let the Iraqi people decide what they want to do. I think that would be much -- the best approach. Yes, I would use this opportunity to say that. And that's what we plan to do. And so, I think that's the best answer to a very, very complicated question and a situation that's now in turmoil inside of Iraq. 
But I think that, in terms of the airplanes, it doesn't come as any surprise to me that Iran is not sending back a bunch of airplanes. Frankly, I'm very pleased that they're not. But that has little to do with who's intervening inside of Iraq


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters in Bethesda, Maryland
March 27, 1991

The President. No, I've said all along that -- well, I've said that we won't have normalized relations as long as he's there. There's enough dissent and disorder that it appears that Iraqi citizens are trying to do something about this. So, we'll wait and see how it plays out. But I think you'd have to put him down as fairly doubtful at this point. 
The President. We were there under the United Nations resolutions. We're now trying to finalize the cease-fire, and that will take care of the U.S. role. Of course, we'll have an interest in seeing that those U.N. -- the new U.N. provisos are complied with. It's a fairly -- fairly stringent requirements, not too stringent because of what he's done. But there are some things that he'll have to do to comply. And that we'll be watching. 
But I want to get our forces back home as soon as I can, and I want to get them out of Iraq as soon as I can. And I think you'll see that they'll come out very fast when we get this cease-fire. 
The President. There will be a cease-fire. That was not a requirement of the United Nations. It's not in the resolutions. 
The President. I have notruledout anything. I'm just saying what's in the cease-fire. 
The President. Not that I know of. 
The President. No, I don't believe that they have. If they have, it hasn't come to me. 
The President. Well, I haven't seen any changes that might have been suggested today, but I am satisfied with the draft we sent up there. There have been a few modifications, but basically it's on track, Helen. 
The President. Well, I didn't say "much longer," but he will not -- put it this way: with this much turmoil, it seems to me unlikely he can survive. People are fedup with him. They see him for the brutal dictator he is. They see him as one who tortured his own people. They see him as one that took his country into a war that was devastating for them. And this turmoil is not simply just historic unrest; it's historic unrest plus great dissatisfaction with Saddam Hussein. 
So, you can figure out what that means in time. I don't know. I don't know how long it will take. 
The President. No. I think we did something that will stand in history as correct. We said that aggression would not stand, and it didn't. And the whole world came together in that. So, there's no hornets' nest open, simply exposing a dictator for what he is and worse. That's what's coming out of it. 


Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters in Hobe Sound, Florida
April 3, 1991

The President. No, I didn't learn anything new. Read some stuff that's not true, but I didn't learn anything new. 
The President. Let me stop you right there. If you're going to ask about intelligence matters, you're wasting time because I never comment on them. And I wouldn't confirm or deny or comment on intelligence matters, particularly findings, in any way. It simply would be inappropriate. 
But what we've done is keep our forces in Iraq, and we'll keep them there until we have a cease-fire agreement. And they'll come out. Hopefully, there will be a blue-helmeted U.N. force or some kind of security force along the border between Kuwait and Iraq, thus relieving the United States of any obligation in this regard. And they'll be coming out just as fast as we can bring them out. 
The President. Well, I feel frustrated any time innocent civilians are being slaughtered. And I feel very frustrated about that. But the United States and these other countries with us in this coalition did not go there to settle all the internal affairs of Iraq. 
I have said that there will not be normalized relations with Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein is in power. And of course I feel a frustration and a sense of grief for the innocents that are being killed brutally. But we are not there to intervene. That is not our purpose; it never was our purpose. I can understand the frustration of some who think it should have been our purpose, some who never supported this in the first place on military action. I share their frustration, but I am not going to commit our forces to something of this nature. I'm not going to do that. 
The President. Because I do not want to see us get sucked into the internal civil war inside Iraq, that's why. 
The President. I don't know whether technically, Lori [Lori Santos, United Press International], it's in violation or not. It is in the fixed-wing planes to fly, but if it is a violation, that doesn't necessarily mean that we are going to commit our young men and our young women into further combat. I will do my level-best to use all diplomatic channels to bring this fighting to a halt. But I do not want to push American forces beyond our mandate. We've done the heavy lifting. Our kids performed with superior courage, and they don't need to be thrust into a war that's been going on for years in there. That's my view. 
The President. Yes. I'm still confident he won't be. I don't think he can survive, and I don't think he should survive. He's not going to have the kind of relations that Iraq should have with other countries as long as he's there. And I haven't changed my view on that at all. 
Most of the people I talk to and hear from around the world, in that part of the world, feel the same way I do about that, incidentally. 
The President. I don't think so. I mean, these cease-fire requirements are fairly straightforward, fairly strong, and they have not been changed by the fighting in Iraq itself. I think what's happened is, if further outrage was possible about Saddam Hussein's brutal behavior, that further outrage has been achieved, you might say. But I don't think it's changed the objectives of these United Nations resolutions that will bring about a cease-fire and will enable me as Commander in Chief to bring our troops home. That's what I want to do. We'll get some security along there. 
We've got a major program for trying to bring peace, security, and stability to the Gulf area. I hope we can be a catalyst in moving the whole peace process forward between Israel and the Palestinians, between the Arab States and Israel, between Lebanon. But we want to get this Gulf matter under control. And I don't feel that the civil war has adversely affected our chances of getting a U.N. resolution or getting the U.N. to act. They should act very, very soon. 
Nobody's sympathetic for Iraq anymore. The very few friends they've had have deserted them because they see this man's abject brutality and lack of conscience. And so, there's no sympathy for Iraq out of this civil unrest. There's sympathy for those that are getting slaughtered, not for the Iraqi regime. I have said that we want to help the innocents, children, those that are starving. I don't care what their politics are, what their previous associations have been. If there's a child hurting, America cares about that. 
But what we don't care about is helping project a regime that has lost all credibility and lost all chance of running the country because of the brutality. And I'm talking about Saddam Hussein himself, personally. 
If his own army would do something about it, maybe we could start over. I think the world has seen even more clearly since the end of the fighting how brutal he is. We saw it in Kuwait, what he did to the Kuwaiti people -- women and children. And now we've seen it, what he's done to the Shiites in the south and the Kurds in the north. He's turned off everybody. If he had one scintilla of good will, it's been dissipated. 
The President. Well, food, medicines. We will do our part. We always have, and we always will. That's the beauty of it. When you see those American soldiers extending their hearts and their hands to those fleeing, when you see them picking up the children, that's the American spirit, and we are going to do that. We are going to continue to help. But we're not going to do anything to help Saddam Hussein. And that distinction is very, very clear. 
The President. I blame Saddam Hussein for the atrocities, and I have made it clear to the Iraqi leaders long before the war started. You go back and take a look at what I said then, because I think it's apropos now -- we do not have an argument with the leadership. Our argument is with the brutality of Saddam Hussein and the orders he's given. Now, does that clear somebody that goes down and rapes a child in Kuwait? No, it does not. But for the most part, it does, because Saddam Hussein has been the major villain there. I would be willing to take a new look if the army took those matters into their own hands, as I've said before. But he's got to go, and he will someday. He can't survive. 
The President. No, no I wasn't surprised about his success of his army. His army has been battered and can no longer project offensive military might against his neighbors. I believe that. But to go in and crush a bunch of people that aren't armed, that doesn't take much macho to do that. It just takes a lot of brutality and cruelty, and that's what's happened. 
The President. If a new regime emerged in there, I'd like to know what their goals are. Do they want to live peacefully in the neighborhood? Do they want to start treating their people with respect? Do they want to try to work out some of the differences with the Kurds that have been there for ages? Are they willing to talk to the Shiite leaders in the south? 
That's what I want to see. And that's what the world wants to see. It's not just what the U.S. wants, incidentally. All our coalition partners are in exactly the same mode on this one as far as I am. I stay in touch with them. I know that. And you haven't seen the call, incidentally, from any of them for the United States to go in and use this superior military might to try to sort out this civil war. But you have seen statements from all of them saying that it would be a good thing if we had new leadership in Iraq, in Baghdad. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan in Newport Beach, California
April 4, 1991

The President. Be glad to. It was never a stated objective of the coalition to intervene in the internal affairs of Iraq. Indeed, I made very clear that we did not intend to go into Iraq. I condemn Saddam Hussein's brutality against his own people. But I do not want to see United States forces, who have performed with such skill and dedication, sucked into a civil war in Iraq. 
We will not have normal relations with Iraq until Saddam Hussein is out of there. But I made very, very clear from day one that it was not an objective of the coalition to get Saddam Hussein out of there by force. And I don't think there's a single parent of a single man or woman that has fought in Desert Storm that wants to see United States forces pushed into this situation -- brutal, tough, deplorable as it is.
The President. I think I was right in 1989, and I think I'm right now. I made clear from the very beginning that it was not an objective of the coalition or the United States to overthrow Saddam Hussein. So, I don't think the Shiites in the south, those who are unhappy with Saddam in Baghdad, or the Kurds in the north ever felt that the United States would come to their assistance to overthrow this man. 
We're not going to get sucked into this by sending precious American lives into this battle. We've fulfilled our obligations. Now, do we hurt when Kurdish people are hurt and killed and brutalized? Yes. Are we concerned at the brutal treatment of the Shiites in the south? Yes. Do we wish that the people would get rid of Saddam Hussein on their own? Absolutely. But I have not misled anybody about the intentions of the United States of America, or has any other coalition partner, all of whom to my knowledge agree with me in this position -- all of whom do.



Remarks at a Meeting With Hispanic Business Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters in Newport Beach, California
April 5, 1991

The second point I wanted to make -- and we can talk about it in a minute -- is about the human suffering in Iraq. I've just put out a statement that shows that we will be doing more. We've already tried to help with the refugees, but we're going to step that way up, and we are going to be dropping supplies to these Kurdish refugees. Jim Baker will be going to the area to talk to other countries, but starting with the conversations in Turkey itself -- Turkey threatened by an enormous amount of refugees pouring across their border. 
I made my positions clear yesterday, and I'll say it again here, that I have no intention of putting American troops into this situation. We've fulfilled our objectives in that regard. But we are going to do what America has always done, and that is, when people are hurting and being brutalized, we're going to help. We're going to continue to help. I saluted in this statement I put out to the British and the -- [applause]. And you know, it's heartbreaking when you see these families on the road, pushed out by a brutal dictator. So, we will do what we can to help there without being bogged down into a ground force action in Iraq. That is not our intention, never has been, and won't be. But we can help a lot, and we will. And we are, as a matter of fact. 
The President. I wanted these guys to hear about it first, and then we'll notify them later on. They'll know about it now by this statement. 
The President. No. It's been all -- no -- -- 
Middle East Peace Negotiations 
 The President. I think every country should do its part, and we certainly would be open-minded. But certainly what I think they ought to do is to be able to peacefully stay in their own area, their own country. And that means a real difference in the way they're being treated. I notice that there was some offer of peaceful return, but that's what should happen. But the United States will do its part in the humanitarian sense. 
The President. I'm very much concerned about the violence and I'm hopeful that that will calm down. But it is not a question where the United States or its coalition partners plan to intervene militarily. We're not going to do that. 


The President's News Conference With Secretary of State James A. Baker III in Houston, Texas
April 6, 1991

The President. Well, we haven't had our discussion yet, and I'm very anxious to talk to the Secretary about his upcoming trip. In just a second I'm going to ask him to make a comment on that trip. But let me just say that I'm very pleased with the reception so far to our refugee relief program for those that have been brutalized and turned into refugees by the Government of Iraq. And it's a good program. It's strong. The air drop will be starting very, very soon. It's just a question of the exact timing I'm not sure of yet, but it will start very, very, very, very soon. And the program is, I think, comprehensive

The President. I might add one more comment before the questions. A letter addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations has been received. We have a copy of it in the State Department. It's 26 pages long. It is being translated. It relates to the U.N. demand that Iraq accept certain conditions in order to finalize the cease-fire. It appears to be positive, but I don't want to get too far out in front on that until we get the total analysis of the letter. But it appears to be a positive response, and that's good. That's a good step. And that will enable us to move more quickly to remove our forces from southern Iraq. 
The President. I'm concerned about it. We are already -- incidentally, speaking of help for refugees, our forces are already taking care of some 40,000 in the south, and we will make arrangements to see that those people are taken care of. But I have no intention of leaving our forces. We made very, very clear from day one so that everybody would understand it, these forces were coming out. 
But I'm hopeful that this positive action in response to the United Nations resolutions will then spill over, and we'll get a little more tranquility inside of Iraq itself. But we'll watch the situation very, very carefully, but I want to keep my commitment to the American people in terms of their sons and daughters and in terms of what our objectives were. And that's exactly what I'm doing. 
The President. Well, it's possible that the United States will have a contribution there, but that has not been finalized. It is essential that there be a force in there. Historically, we've not been in these peacekeeping forces, but it depends on what the whole makeup of the force is. And if that will enhance the peace, why, I'd be openminded on that question. 
The President. No -- I see your point -- no. I think it would not because I think we're talking about an international force. We have -- you remember Colonel Higgins. Now, he was a member of a peacekeeping force, a UNIFIL force. So, there is some precedent. But we're not talking here about a lot of troops or anything of that nature. When I said we weren't in it, I now think of the Higgins case and I'm sure there are others, other people involved from the United States. I guess to clarify it, I should say there would not be a lot of U.S. troops involved in something of this nature. 
The President. We're not sure yet, Rita [Rita Beamish, Associated Press]. And thus, I'm not going to comment further. I talked to Jim earlier, and neither of us have the final word on that. Dennis Ross just went and checked so I could give you the latest answer, but we do not have the final interpretation of this. There is some griping about the severity of the U.N. conditions, but that is just too bad, because the United Nations has acted and Iraq -- Saddam Hussein is in no position, in my view, to barter on something of this nature. 
And so, I hope that there's just a lot of front-end rhetoric and the answer is that they do that which the international community has called on them to do, and that is to accept all terms of the cease-fire, all the terms that were put down for them. 
The President. We'll take a look here at all of that, but we want to see full compliance, and we want to see a cessation of the brutality in Iraq. 
The President. I'm just not going to comment on it until we see it. I don't care how much griping they do. I want to know whether they're going to accept it or not. Let them go forth with their rhetoric. We've listened to that. The American people heard that for about 6 months, and it didn't change one thing. But the answer is: What's the bottom line, and when are they going to accept it, and how firm will the acceptance be? And that's what the United States and our coalition partners will be looking for. 
The President. Well, I think that this one includes fulfillment of the others. It talks, for example, about not -- we don't call it reparations, but what's the technical term we use? 

Remarks Commemorating the National Days of Thanksgiving in Houston, Texas
April 7, 1991

I read the letter that John sent to Reverend Di Paola about his second combat mission over Iraq. It was as terrifying as it was majestic. He describes an unnerving silence amidst missile trails and bright flashes of flak; the only sounds, the dull roar of his engine, the radio, and the beeping of his radar alarm. And although he didn't mention it, probably the beating of his heart felt pretty loud at that time. [Laughter] 
Dear God, we humbly give you our heartfelt thanks. We thank you for bringing the war to a quick end. We thank you for sparing the lives of so many of our men and women who went to the Gulf. We ask you to bring comfort to the families of those who gave their lives for their country. We ask you to protect the innocents who this very day are suffering in Iraq and elsewhere. We give thanks for the bravery and steadfast support of our coalition partners, and yes, we pray for our enemies, that a just peace may come to their troubled land.


Remarks Following Discussions With President Jacques Delors of the European Economic Community and President Jacques Santer of the European Council of Ministers
April 11, 1991

Presidents Santer and Delors and I also reviewed the massive and urgent U.S. and European relief effort currently underway for the Iraqi refugees and displaced persons in Turkey, northern Iraq, and Iran. To ease the human suffering caused by Saddam's brutality and repression of his own people, the United States and the European Community are working to get urgently critical supplies of food and shelter and medicine to the refugees as quickly as possible. A number of European nations are cooperating with the United States in airlifting these supplies to Turkey and to concentrations of refugees in the largest relief effort mounted in modern military history.


Exchange With Reporters on Aid to Iraqi Refugees
April 11, 1991

The President. We're going to do what we need for humanitarian relief. And there is no difference between the United Kingdom and the United States, and there's no difference between the EC and the United States, and there's no difference between the United Nations Secretary-General and the United States on this question. So, I hope that you will understand that. There is no difference on this. 
The President. We're looking forward to give relief to these people where they are. We're going to continue to do that. And I do not expect any interference from the man in Baghdad, and he knows better than to interfere. 
The President. Charles [Charles Bierbauer, Cable News Network], you're off on the wrong track. If you'd listen to what I said, you'd be right about this. There is no difference between these people. And it takes the United Nations action to do some formalization; that's not what we're doing. We're going to help these refugees, and please don't try to make a difference where there isn't any. If you don't believe me, do what I did yesterday: Talk to John Major, and you will see there are no differences. The United States is taking the leadership role on bringing refugees support, and we're going to continue to do it. And we're doing a magnificent job in conjunction with these allies. 
And P.S., I am not going to involve any American troops in a civil war in Iraq. They are not going to be going in there to do what some of my severest critics early on now seem to want me to do. I want these kids to come home. And that's what's going to happen. And we are going to do what is right by these refugees, and I think the American people expect that, and they want that. But I don't think they want to see us bogged down in a civil war by sending in the 82d Airborne or the 101st or the 7th Cavalry. And so, I want to get that matter cleared up. 

Remarks at Maxwell Air Force Base War College in Montgomery, Alabama
April 13, 1991

Today, thank God, Kuwait is free. But turmoil in that tormented region of the world continues. Saddam's continued savagery has placed his regime outside the international order. We will not interfere in Iraq's civil war. Iraqi people must decide their own political future. 
Looking out here at you and thinking of your families, let me comment a little further. We set our objectives. These objectives, sanctioned by international law, have been achieved. I made very clear that when our objectives were obtained that our troops would be coming home. And yes, we want the suffering of those refugees to stop, and in keeping with our nation's compassion and concern, we are massively helping. But yes, I want our troops out of Iraq and back home as soon as possible. 
Internal conflicts have been raging in Iraq for many years. And we're helping out, and we're going to continue to help these refugees. But I do not want one single soldier or airman shoved into a civil war in Iraq that's been going on for ages. And I'm not going to have that. 
I know the coalition's historic effort destroyed Saddam's ability to undertake aggression against any neighbor. You did that job. But now the international community will further guarantee that Saddam's ability to threaten his neighbors is completely eliminated by destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. 
And as I just mentioned, we will continue to help the Iraqi refugees, the hundreds and thousands of victims of this man's -- Saddam Hussein's -- brutality. See food and shelter and safety and the opportunity to return unharmed to their homes. We will not tolerate any interference in this massive international relief effort. Iraq can return to the community of nations only when its leaders abandon the brutality and repression that is destroying their country. With Saddam in power, Iraq will remain a pariah nation, its people denied moral contacts with most of the outside world.

Remarks on Assistance for Iraqi Refugees and a News Conference
April 16, 1991

Eleven days ago, on April 5th, I announced that the United States would initiate what soon became the largest U.S. relief effort mounted in modern military history. Such an undertaking was made necessary by the terrible human tragedy unfolding in and around Iraq as a result of Saddam Hussein's brutal treatment of Iraqi citizens. 
Within 48 hours, our operation was providing scores of tons of food, water, coats, tents, blankets, and medicines to the Iraqi Kurds in northern Iraq and southern Turkey. The scale of this effort is truly unprecedented. Yet the fact remains that the scale of the problem is even greater. Hundreds of thousands of Iraqi Kurds are in difficult-to-reach mountain areas in southern Turkey and along the Turkish-Iraq border. 
The Government of Turkey, along with U.S., British, and French military units, and numerous international organizations, have launched a massive relief operation. But despite these efforts, hunger, malnutrition, disease, and exposure are taking their grim toll. No one can see the pictures or hear the accounts of this human suffering -- men, women, and most painfully of all, innocent children -- and not be deeply moved. 
It is for this reason that this afternoon, following consultations with Prime Minister Major, President Mitterrand, President Ozal of Turkey, Chancellor Kohl this morning, U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar, I'm announcing a greatly expanded and more ambitious relief effort. The approach is quite simple: If we cannot get adequate food, medicine, clothing, and shelter to the Kurds living in the mountains along the Turkish-Iraq border, we must encourage the Kurds to move to areas in northern Iraq where the geography facilitates rather than frustrates such a large-scale relief effort. 
Consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 688 and working closely with the United Nations and other international relief organizations and our European partners, I have directed the U.S. military to begin immediately to establish several encampments in northern Iraq where relief supplies for these refugees will be made available in large quantities and distributed in an orderly way. 
I can well appreciate that many Kurds have good reason to fear for their safety if they return to Iraq. And let me reassure them that adequate security will be provided at these temporary sites by U.S., British, and French air and ground forces, again consistent with United Nations Security Council Resolution 688. We are hopeful that others in the coalition will join this effort. 
I want to underscore that all that we are doing is motivated by humanitarian concerns. We continue to expect the Government of Iraq not to interfere in any way with this latest relief effort. The prohibition against Iraqi fixed- or rotary-wing aircraft flying north of the 36th parallel thus remains in effect. 
And I want to stress that this new effort, despite its scale and scope, is not intended as a permanent solution to the plight of the Iraqi Kurds. To the contrary, it is an interim measure designed to meet an immediate, penetrating humanitarian need. Our long-term objective remains the same: for Iraqi Kurds and, indeed, for all Iraqi refugees, wherever they are, to return home and to live in peace, free from repression, free to live their lives. 
I also want to point out that we're acutely concerned about the problem of the Iraqi refugees now along the Iran-Iraq border and in Iran. I commend the members of the European Community for their efforts to alleviate hardship in this area. We, ourselves, have offered to contribute to international efforts designed to meet this humanitarian challenge. 
As I stated earlier, the relief effort being announced here today constitutes an undertaking different in scale and approach. What is not different is basic policy. All along, I have said that the United States is not going to intervene militarily in Iraq's internal affairs and risk being drawn into a Vietnam-style quagmire. This remains the case. Nor will we become an occupying power with U.S. troops patrolling the streets of Baghdad. 
We intend to turn over the administration of and security for these sites as soon as possible to the United Nations, just as we are fulfilling ourcommitment to withdraw our troops and hand over responsibility to U.N. forces along Iraq's southern border, the border with Kuwait. 
But we must do everything in our power to save innocent life. This is the American tradition, and we will continue to live up to that tradition. 
The President. I don't think we have responded too little, too late. It is an extraordinarily difficult logistical problem. And we have been, as I said in my statement, sending lots of humanitarian relief in there -- not just the United States, incidentally, other countries as well, a lot of private relief organizations helping out. So, this has been our policy. But I think we have a better chance to facilitate the relief and to get the Kurds in more sanitary conditions by this new program I've announced here today. There's been an awful lot of consultation with the Turks and others going into this. And in terms of the other, I simply don't accept that. 
The President. You mean in this new operation? We don't know that. We don't know that, but clearly the sooner the better. The United Nations forces will be coming down into the south -- the Blue Helmets. And we hope and expect that to be accomplished in a very few days. But this one we're just starting, but we'll have to see what we do. And it may require for a U.N. peacekeeping force in there -- or U.N. Blue Helmets -- a new resolution from the Security Council. And that's a complicated problem, given the fact that some of the members who were steadfastly with us in the coalition might have problems with something of this nature. 
The President. I hope not. We've got enough -- what looks like permanent refugees, and we're trying to do something about that in various areas. The objectives were set out very early on. And the objectives never included going into Baghdad, never included the demise and destruction of Saddam personally. You had many people that were telling me early on, let sanctions work. Let sanctions work. Don't do anything about the aggression at all. We led an international coalition of unprecedented, historic proportions and achieved objectives. 
And you're asking me if I foresaw the size of the Kurdish refugee problem? The answer is: No, I did not. But do I think that the United States should bear guilt because of suggesting that the Iraqi people take matters into their own hands, with the implication being given by some that the United States would be there to support them militarily? That was not true. We never implied that. Do I think the answer is now for Saddam Hussein to be kicked out? Absolutely. Because there will not be -- -- 
The President. May I finish, please? There will not be normalized relations with the United States -- and I think this is true for most coalition partners -- until Saddam Hussein is out of there. And we will continue the economic sanctions. 
The President. I don't concede encouraging an exodus. I did suggest -- and it's well documented -- what I thought would be good is if the Iraqi people would take matters into their own hands and kick Saddam Hussein out. I still feel that way, and I still hope they do. 
The President. I think rather small numbers because I don't think Saddam Hussein, given the assurances he made today to the United Nations in Iraq -- they had some representatives there -- would venture to use force. But the problem isn't what we think about it; the problem is what do these Kurdish refugees who have been brutalized by this man think. And what they think is, look, we don't want to take his word. We need some security. 
The President. Well, I think they're talking with the United Nations people about encampments being set up. But this is the first word they know as to what the United States is going to do about it -- authoritative word. 
The President. They should not respond militarily. And they underestimated the United States once before on that, and they shouldn't do it again. And I don't think they will. And the United Nations people who have been talking to them in Baghdad don't think that there will be a military response. And since we said no action north of the 36th parallel, in fairness, there hasn't been any military action north of the 36th parallel. 
The President. I hope we're not talking about a long-term effort. We're working with the French, who've taken a leadership role in a policy to encourage the Kurds to return to the cities. There's some talk about trying to get a U.N. presence along these various way stations as they go back. That would be a very useful idea, and I told Mr. Mitterrand I supported him strongly on that. 
But in this one, I don't think it has to be long-term. The main thing, long-term or short-term, from the very beginning we've been trying to save the lives of these women and children and men. And now this is a logical next step to get it done much more sanitarily, get it done in a safe and sensible way. 
And some might argue that this is an intervention into the internal affairs of Iraq. But I think the humanitarian concern, the refugee concern is so overwhelming that there will be a lot of understanding about this. 
The President. Well, that was the question I used to get before the war started against -- what are you going to do; how are you going to respond to this? And I won't give you any details, but I will simply suggest that these people will be protected. We are not going to say to them, "Come down from the mountains; you will be protected," and then not protect them. 
The President. We're going to have what you call a supply train. There will be strong -- I mean, not train in the sense of railroad train, but a supply train -- and there will be a lot of international support for that. The Turks will facilitate this. I can't give you -- there will be maybe five or six camps in these so-called -- what Ozal calls "flat areas" -- but I can't give you an exact estimate on the mileage. 
It's not too far in terms of long distances. But what we've got to do now is get in there and build these camps and keep ourcommitment to be sure that they are safe, and I think they will be. And then you ask a very good question, because how you talk these scared people into coming down, that's another question. But we will be doing our level-best, and we have very good people on the ground there now. 
The President. Relatively small numbers, and I'm very confident of their safety. We'll have air power around there if needed. We'll be able to protect not only our own people but we'll be able to protect the people that we're setting out to protect, which is these refugees. 
The President. Yes, I do. I think this is entirely different, and I just feel it's what's needed in terms of helping these people. Some may interpret it that way; I don't. I think it's purely humanitarian. And I think representations have been made as recently as today that these people would be safe, so I hope it proves that way. 
The President. The United Nations will be in there soon, and we think that will be very good assurance that they will not be attacked. People forget that the United States has been doing a wonderful job for those refugees for a long time. I've seen no credit given to our troops that are handling that with great concern and compassion. They have done a superb job. 
So, what we want to do is see -- in that neutral zone -- see the Blue Helmets come in there, and then I will continue to keep moving our people out as rapidly as possible. I want to bring them home. 
The President. I think there will be enough. I think that we're operating on the assumption that they will not be attacked with the United Nations in there. I think that would be a serious problem for Saddam Hussein if he took on the entire United Nations, having agreed to these cease-fire conditions. So, I would just stand with that. 
The President. I seldom differ with my wife, and I don't know that I would differ with her here. I'll tell you what's the most important thing, however, and that is to get Saddam Hussein out of there. So, if you came to me as a broker and you said, I can get him out of there, but he'd have to be able to live a happy life forevermore in some third country with all kinds of conditions never to go back and brutalize his people again, I'd have to think about it, but I might be willing to say, well, as far as our pressing charges, we'd be willing to get him out. We want him out of there so badly, and I think it's so important to the tranquillity of Iraq that under that condition we might. 
But his crimes -- do I think he's guilty of war crimes? The environmental terror, the rape and pillage of Kuwait, what he's done to his own people? I would think there would be plenty of grounds under which he would be prosecuted for war crimes. 
The President. I think that's unacceptable. I'm not sure that's exactly what President Nixon said, either. 
The President. Well, I'm positive in my own mind -- put it this way -- in my own mind, my judgment is -- and I think it's the collective judgment of the people that figured the war out pretty well -- is that he won't risk this. And Saddam Hussein is not going to want to reengage in that nature. So, we'll have to see. But certainly, any U.S. forces -- and we're not talking about large numbers, I don't know exactly what the numbers are -- will be protected. And they will be protected vigorously. But I don't anticipate that. I don't expect, and I don't think the French President expects that; I don't think the British Prime Minister expects it; I don't think the United Nations Secretary-General expects it; the President of Turkey -- and we've got a lot of people working this problem. 
It is the collective judgment -- and they've been right far more than wrong on these matters -- that this will not take place. But we're prepared if any force should be used against these helpless people in the refugee camps. 
The President. I've got to be careful about my reaction to some of that because -- maybe you could help me by explaining which people -- from what view? The ones that wanted sanctions to work, or ones that didn't want use of military force ever under any condition? Which ones are you talking about? 
The President. Well, he's entitled to his opinion. I think we completed the objectives that we spelled out; they were fulfilled. And I think the whole world knows that. Now we have another problem, a problem that's a recurring problem. This man has brutalized these people before, and now he's doing it again. 
I think I would call to the attention of the critics what the objectives were, what the United Nations resolutions called for. And I think that they were admirably completed. And I am surprised at some who strongly oppose the use of force now sound to me, from some of their clarion calls, that they want to use force to solve the matters in Baghdad, and that is not what we are going to do. And if you did do it, you'd certainly want to go back through the diplomatic approach, and certainly I would not want to do that without having a lot of these people on the record in terms of support. 
But I don't think that's needed. I don't believe that's what we ought to be doing. I think the American people want their sons and daughters to come home, and they're going to come home. And the only little difficulty now in terms of coming home is that we have a responsibility to do what we can to help these refugees. We've been doing it from day one. And now, as the problem gets worse and as we see the fear in these people's hearts about coming down out of the mountains, we're taking this next step. 
But the fundamental policy is to bring our men and women home, and that's exactly what we're doing in the south. Gerry [Gerald Seib, Wall Street Journal] asked theright question: What guarantee? The guarantee is the agreement itself that was enacted by the United Nations and agreed to by Iraq, and the presence of Blue Helmets of the United Nations peacekeeping force. 
The President. So, what does he want us to do? I just haven't followed what he's been saying on this subject. 
The President. You know, I can understand people thinking that. I can understand their criticism. And then, how do you take care of the tanks and the riflemen and the other parts of the divisions that remained in northern Iraq? Helicopters is but a part of it. 
You can say, well, if you'd have done that, maybe he'd have stopped. I don't believe that, but I don't fault him for that, if that's what his position was. 
The President. I said early on that it was not an objective of the United States to see a fractured, destabilized Iraq. And that is the position of our Government, the position of our coalition forces. That's the answer. 
The President. No. I say, no, I believe Iraq ought to live in peace and reconciliation with the various factions in Iraq. You've got the Shiites in the south, you've got the center -- the Sunis and the Baathists and whoever in the center, and you have the Kurds in the north. They should reconcile their differences and keep that country, with its proud traditions, intact. 
But that's a matter that we are not going to try to suggest that it be divided up, if that's what your question is. And I hope I've made that clear from the very beginning. 
The President. Yes, I hope they can. Well, good question. They're scared to death to come down out of the mountains. But that's a very good question. But they've got to figure that out. And I think one of the things we're -- I'm most hopeful about is that this plan by Francois Mitterrand bears some fruit -- this way station approach so people can come back. 
Now, Saddam Hussein has said for them to come back; they don't believe him. They've been betrayed by him. So, I would hope, yes, that someday they would be able to go back. A lot of them aren't country people. I've heard yesterday on some of the news of city people who were lawyers and doctors and have fled from their rather pleasant lives. 
So, I would hope that there could be a reconciliation. And the easiest way for the country to be reconciled is to have a new leader. There's no question about that. 
The President. No, not that I know of, Maureen [Maureen Santini, New York Daily News]. 
The President. I would think so, but I can't prove it. 
The President. Well, there's a lot of people, a lot of resistance groups, that would like to see him out of there. They haven't come to me about it. But there's no question about a lot of people that are Iraqis that want to see him out. No question about that. But if you're asking if they've come here to the White House or proposals of that nature, I don't believe so. 

Remarks on Signing the Federal Energy Management Executive Order
April 17, 1991

I will say that the priority is, get the relief to these people that are suffering. Then we'll talk about that. But this relief effort will go and must go smoothly. And then we can consider extraneous matters, matters that may be important to Iraq. But our priorities -- the world's priorities -- are set. And they say, let these refugees be settled on the flat places temporarily, and let them be fed, let medicine get in there. 
And then when that is done and everything's done peacefully and harmoniously, then I might be willing to consider something else. But we're not going to -- we're going to be sure what comes first. And what comes first is taking care of these people that have been deprived of their homes and that are terrified and also that are suffering very much. So, that's the order in which we will address these problems

Remarks Following Discussions With President Hassan Gouled Aptidon of Djibouti and an Exchange With Reporters
April 24, 1991

President Bush. We're working on the problem. I'll have a little more to say about it later. There are serious problems, but I think we're getting it under control


Remarks at an Arbor Day Tree-Planting Ceremony and an Exchange With Reporters
April 26, 1991

The President. Let me finish the tree ceremony here before I address myself to Iraq, if that's all right. I may not address myself to Iraq, either, but 

The President. Yes, they're not going to -- they don't want to tangle with the U.S. again. They -- 
The President. -- -- learned that the hard way, and the forces are there to be sure that it's good; put it that way. We're not looking for any fight. We want to help these Kurds, and we are. What the United States has done in terms of bringing relief to these pitiful people is just -- we all ought to take great pride in the way our country is responding -- and I might say at considerable cost. We're doing it because it's right. 
But I do not want to intervene and get our troops hauled into some conflict that's been going on for years. But when it comes to helping people, the United States is today doing what it's always done -- being out in front on the relief effort. But I don't expect, Rita [Rita Beamish, Associated Press], any complication. I don't think Saddam Hussein is dumb enough to want to run into the U.S. troops again. 
The President. I don't know that there's going to be lasting peace in Iraq. Peace has escaped those people for years. So, I would hope, though, that the lesson having been taught to Saddam Hussein about aggression, that some of that lesson might spill over in terms of his own internal problems. I would hope that maybe out of the talks he's having with the Kurdish leaders you'll see some long-sought-after peace. But I can't certify that. And I would hope that -- I would hope -- -- 
The President. They're going to stay there as long as it takes to be sure these refugees are taken care of, and not a minute longer. We're continuing to pull troops back. I want these kids home, and so do the American people want them home. P.s.: We will do what's necessary to see that this refugee aid gets to the people that need it, and gets there so that they can have it in safety. And then beyond that, we talked yesterday to the Secretary-General, and the U.N. has a major role to play here. Some of the United Nations critics ought to open their eyes, because the United Nations not only had a significant role in the repelling of aggression, which was our objective, but it is also playing a significant role in this refugee relief. So, we're going to continue on that track. 
The President. I'm confident he will because there will not be normal relationships with the United States or many other countries as long as he is in power. Those sanctions are going to stay there as far as we're concerned, and undoing some evil that is not going to -- by that, I mean, working out something possibly with the Kurds -- that's only part of the problem. And so, there will not be normal relations with this man as long as I'm President of the United States. I'll guarantee you that. 
The President. The fact that he's been whipped bad in the military. His aggression -- he's been forced to that which he said he would never do. His people don't like him, and it's only terror that's keeping him in power. And someday history will show you these things manage to take care of themselves. And I hope it happens soon because we want him out of there. 
We don't have any fight with the Iraqi people. I've said that from day one. Go back and look at the text back in August, September, October. Our fight is not with the Iraqi people. Our objective was to repel aggression, and we did it. And the American troops deserve enormous credit, and they're getting it every single day they come home. But beyond that, this internal matter has been going on for years -- years and years. And I'd like to see it ended. And one good way to end it is to have somebody with a little more compassion as President of Iraq. But let them worry about that problem. I worry about it because there won't be normal relations until he's gone. But history has a way of taking care of tyrants.

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the National Association of Farm Broadcasters
April 29, 1991

There are, however, a few questions remaining. One relates to Iraq having been one of our good customers for our farm products. Is any thought being given already toward the restoration of this trade? 
The President. The restoration of food support for Iraq is underway, the United Nations having taken some steps. We are not going to let people starve. But in terms of building reliable markets and in terms of trying to have normalized trade, the United States will not have normalized trade as long as Saddam Hussein is in power. 
Food is an exception now, because we're not going to let people starve. We are going to go forward with helping people in Iraq without regard to what sect they're from or anything of that nature. But I don't want to mislead any farmer in this country. We will not have normalized trade with Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein is in office. And they're now trying to appeal to get some relief on the oil. There's not going to be any relief as far as the United States goes until they move forward on a lot of fronts, incidentally. I mean, what's happened to these Kurds is absolutely -- it's so sad you're just moved

Exchange With Reporters Aboard Air Force One
May 4, 1991

The President. I wouldn't phrase it that way. I've always said that we were not interested in a dismembered or fractionated Iraq. That's not our -- I made that so very clear from the very beginning that there shouldn't be any question about that one


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With President Mauno Koivisto of Finland
May 7, 1991

This visit, albeit very brief, gave me an opportunity to thank you personally for Finland's constructive policy in the Middle East. Your country's strong leadership in the U.N. Security Council and the Iraqi Sanctions Committee last fall and your generous aid to the people suffering from Iraqi oppression represent Finland's fine tradition of active partnership in the community of nations.

This sense of responsibility led Finland, within a year of its admission to the U.N., to serve as part of the U.N. Emergency Force in 1956 following the Suez crisis. Finns have served bravely in virtually every peacekeeping force since then, contributing more troops than any other country. Your nation continues this proud tradition in the current U.N. observer force in Kuwait and Iraq

When we last met in Helsinki in September at the American-Soviet top-level meeting on the Persian Gulf, the world was facing a direct challenge to the rule of law. The Iraqi aggression was repelled by the coalition. Kuwait is now free. Finland faced her responsibility in the United Nations Security Council in its decision to thwart the aggression. And now work must continue to build a new, equitable world.


Remarks Announcing the Resignation of William H. Webster as Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and a News Conference
May 8, 1991

The President. Well, we're looking into that. Fortunately it didn't hit anybody. And I gathered from the Pentagon they're not particularly concerned. But we have to look into that

The President. Well, as you know, I expressed my concern early on that I did not want to get bogged down. But what we're doing is humanitarian. We're getting enormous credit, finally -- not that we're in there for credit -- for saving lives and helping innocent victims of Saddam Hussein's brutality. And so, you raise a very good question because I don't want to see us get into a quagmire or get further militarily involved with some permanent presence required. I will be talking to the Secretary-General of the U.N., I think it's tomorrow, and I would hope that the U.N. could do in the north that which they're doing in the south.


Remarks Announcing the Nomination of Robert M. Gates To Be Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and a News Conference
May 14, 1991

The President. No, I think the way I'd do this is to say that it's surprising there have been so few flareups of this nature. Tempers are high; it's very difficult for these refugees. And so I don't expect any more. And we're working with -- we're starting consultations with the United Nations. I think you saw Prince Sadruddin Khan's comments yesterday about getting U.N. flags over some of the convoys. So, we're moving. I want to see this internationalized. But it is to a degree because we have British and French forces there. 
The President. Well, I'd leave that to the people that are trying to separate the forces there. And I don't -- what they should do is be careful not to put any of these refugees or any allied troops into harm's way

Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters
May 15, 1991

The President. I don't know on that. We may -- we're contemplating going to the United Nations on that to get further authority, although we think that we have authority under existing resolutions. 
The President. I don't have a percentage in mind. We're working out administration positions on that. But the main thing is full compliance with all the U.N. resolutions. And so, that's the key point. I don't know where the talks stand between the Kurds and the center and Saddam Hussein, but that could offer some hope. But I don't think that we can just entrust the fate of the Kurds to the word of Saddam Hussein.

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany
May 20, 1991

The President. We will abide by the United Nations resolutions, of course. It is our policy that there will not be normalized relations. And it is my view that only if the sanctions are complied with will we be willing to -- I mean, only if every provision of the United Nations resolutions are complied with would we, the United States, be willing to lift sanctions. 
The President. There are certain areas where Iraq, in order to comply with United Nations sanctions, must sell abroad. They've got funds set up to put some of their oil revenues into it. But all of these things are down the road. At this juncture, my view is we don't want to lift these sanctions as long as Saddam Hussein is in power.
We discussed the European security and the importance of NATO in terms of future security for Europe. We both agreed that we have a lot at stake in the successful conclusion of the Uruguay round. We had detailed discussions about the Soviet Union, and Chancellor Kohl shared with me his thoughts on that important question. And I had a chance to thank Chancellor Kohl for Germany's support during the war and to congratulate him for the leadership role that Germany took in trying to bring aid to the Kurds over there in Iraq.


Remarks at the Yale University Commencement Ceremony in New Haven, Connecticut
May 27, 1991

This same approach guides our policy towards the People's Republic of China, home to fully one-fifth of the world's people. China easily can affect the stability of the Asian-Pacific region and, therefore, affect the entire world's peace and prosperity. The Chinese play a central role in working to resolve the conflict in Cambodia and relax tensions on the Korean Peninsula. China has a voice now in the multinational organizations. And its votes in the United Nations Security Council against Iraq's brutal aggression helped us forge the broad coalition that brought us victory in the Gulf. And so, when we find opportunities to cooperate with China, we will explore them. When problems arise with China's behavior, we will take appropriate action. 
And finally, we continue urging China to exercise restraint in its weapons exports. Our recent experience with Iraq proves how dangerous the deadly trade can be. And very soon, I will announce significant new steps that we can take to control arms exports to the entire Middle East. Every nation must play a part in this effort. That's why we urge the Chinese Government to abide by the letter and spirit of international agreements on missile technology controls, and to do what 141 other nations have already done: sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty


Remarks at the Annual Southern Baptist Convention in Atlanta, Georgia
June 6, 1991

Now to this story about a Kurdish family, Mikail and Safiya Dosky, who escaped from Iraq over a decade ago. During their perilous journey across the Iranian border, they became separated from their 2-year-old daughter, Gilawish. Mikail and his wife made it; the child, left behind. Their daughter did not make it out. 
After settling in America, Mikail, the father, kept trying to get his daughter out of Iraq, even traveling there himself, but to no avail. And just a few weeks ago, the dad, Mikail, got a phone call from an American helicopter pilot in Turkey, one of our heroes. This pilot had been flying supplies to save the lives of these Kurdish refugees when he got a note from Gilawish -- now, this child, now 18 years old -- asking him to call her parents in America. He did, and Mikail's friends at the First Baptist Church in Alexandria, Virginia, helped him get to Turkey and bring his daughter back. And after thousands of miles, thousands of days, and thousands of dollars, Mikail and Gilawish arrived in America Tuesday night -- where years of sorrow were washed away with tears of joy.

Remarks at the Swearing-In Ceremony for Henry Catto as Director of the United States Information Agency
June 7, 1991

And of course, I really wanted to have this occasion over here because I wanted to recognize the talented professionals of USIA. One of the reasons that I'm here today is to thank all of you for an awful lot, but especially for your dedicated service during Desert Shield and Desert Storm. I know many of you put in an awful lot of hours. For many, it was a round-the-clock effort. The expertise of your people in the field, the fine Gulf war pamphlets that you produced, all the extra hours behind the microphone at VOA and in USIA's TV studios helped us get the word out, helped people in the Middle East and around the world separate fact from fiction about Iraq's aggression and the intentions of Saddam Hussein. We were up against an enormous propaganda machine from various quarters overseas. And I think that you all distinguished yourselves with great honor and great credit to the United States of America. So, thank you from this grateful heart. 
Let me just close now with the business at hand, a personal note about my dear friend and your new Director. Back on August 2d, the day that the Iraqi tanks first rolled into Kuwait, both Margaret Thatcher and I were scheduled to take part in an Aspen Institute conference out in Colorado -- Aspen, Colorado. 

Remarks to Members of the Defense Community at Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland
June 11, 1991

Among those who deserve special credit for the accomplishment are the members of this committee who gave that plane, the F - 117, their strong and continuous support. And there now is no question, Stealth works. And it's been proven in combat. And it broke the Iraqis' back, and it saved precious American lives. It flew hundreds of sorties through the most heavily defended areas without a scratch. 
Today's generation of fighters drove the Iraqi Air Force from the skies. The F - 22 that we see here, the prototype of the next air superiority fighter, combined Stealth and maneuverability in a way that ensures the American forces in the next century will be able to count on control of the air.

Interview With Linda Douglas of KNBC, Jim Lampley of KCBS, and Paul Moyer of KABC in Los Angeles, California
June 15, 1991

The President. Well, may I remind you a little history. The policy was not to get him out of office; the policy was to get him out of Kuwait. International statements by the United Nations in concert said, this aggression won't stand. The original callfor sanctions by those who opposed my policy right up to the very end was, "Sanctions will get him out of Kuwait; sanctions will reverse the aggression." It was very clear to me that it wouldn't. And so, out he went from Kuwait -- which would have, under the policy of everybody, achieved all the objectives. It achieved ours. 
Then along comes the Kurd problem and the Shiite problem. And my view is, we will not have normalized relations with Saddam Hussein as long as he's behaving this way. But get it in focus. Don't change the goalposts, I tell my critics. The goalposts were, aggression will not stand. And aggression didn't stand. And it was an enormous victory that was properly celebrated here and all around the world. 
Now, am I happy that Saddam Hussein is there? Absolutely not. Will we lighten up on international sanctions as long as he's there? No. But I must clarify, because the way your question came at me made me think of some of the political critics who were saying we didn't succeed. We did succeed. And our objective was never to throw him out of office. Look at all the U.N. resolutions. 
So, I'm still hopeful that, recognizing the economy in that country is very sorry, that the Iraqi people will do what they should have done long ago, in my view. This man is unforgivably brutal. What he's done to the environment, what he did to the people of Kuwait, what he's doing to his own people is unconscionable. But it was not an objective of the United Nations resolutions or the U.S. policy to throw him out of office. The objective was to throw him out of Kuwait, and boy, did our people perform well. 
The President. The implications are that he is violating agreements with the overall peace agreement. The implications are that he's got to -- I mean, the answer to these charges is that we're going to have to find out how much of all these allegations are true and make him comply with what is now international law through an agreement with all the parties that they would fully account for what's left. 
And so, there are a lot of sources. I think you're dealing, understandably, with part of the data. I hope I'm dealing with more of the data. I don't think either of us is dealing with all of the data. So, one, we've got to establish the facts, and two, we have to make clear that he will not remain with a nuclear capability. And, yes, probably some of it did survive, obviously. And I can state this without contradiction: His ability to project all this into an atomic weapon has been set back into the Dark Ages. But nevertheless, you're right when you say there should -- or indicate that there should be concern about his possession of any of these things. 
So, we've got to probe. The U.N. has a committee; they must go and examine every lead. They must go into the geography, into the places that defectors or any other pieces of intelligence lead us. And he better be open about it. And that's one more reason there will not be any normalized relations under the status quo.

Remarks to the Asian-Pacific Community in Fountain Valley, California
June 16, 1991

Now, here's my signs back here. Get them up high so the press can see them. Where's the one with "SADDAM"? Where is it? Well, I don't see it. But let me tell you, they are right. They are absolutely correct. We will not remove sanctions from Iraq as long as the brutal Saddam Hussein remains in power

So, I wanted to say I am very proud to have been here today. I see the signs from the various countries, and thank heavens, I've been enriched by being in almost every one of them. I think of the tragedies in Bangladesh, and then I think of our helicopter pilots that went in on their way home, gave up coming home to save lives there. I think of Iraq and what our young men and women did. And yes, I think of those who lost their lives in Iraq. And it would never have happened if the brutality of Saddam Hussein hadn't overcome reason and rationality. I think of Cambodia and India and Pakistan. And I think of all of these -- and Vietnam -- you are right, you are right, Vietnam -- look at what the contribution Vietnamese have made to our great country. And we're never going to forget that Vietnam is not free and democratic, as some of our critics would have you believe.


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil
June 18, 1991

Brazil knows well the importance of united efforts, aligning with the allies in both World Wars, its brave expeditionary forces playing a key role in World War II. A half-century later, Brazil supported the United Nations resolutions and sanctions against Iraq despite significant economic losses to Brazil. And that, Mr. President, testifies not just to your vision but to your courage; and for this, we thank you, also


Exchange With Reporters Aboard Air Force One
June 28, 1991

The President. I'm very concerned. I understand the Secretary-General had a press conference on this expressing the concern of the United Nations, generally. And if, again, this is represented to me that he condemned these actions, why, clearly, we're in that view. But we've got some serious work now ahead of us -- diplomatic, diplomatic process has to start. We can't, from a U.S. standpoint, permit this brutal bully to go back on what was a solemn agreement and to threaten people that are there under U.N. jurisdiction. And that's exactly what he appears to have done. 
The man has no shame. And he goes to these extraordinary ends, and I think world opinion will mount fast against him on this issue. I mean, shooting in the air to scare off people sanctioned by the United Nations who are there to expose what this man has done. I mean, I don't think the world will support this at all, anybody. The United States certainly won't. So, now the question is, what do you do about it? Deliberately take time to work the diplomacy, and this is under the auspices of two United Nations resolutions. And I think we need to be sure that we start immediate consultation at the U.N. 
And then don't press me what I'll do beyond that because I'm not prepared to say, not prepared to say what we'll do. 
The President. Well, I think some could argue that the U.N. resolutions have already spoken on all meansnecessary, 678 having been incorporated into a more recent resolution. So, that's the way I'd answer that. 
The President. Yes, I'm totally satisfied of that. I've seen incontrovertible evidence to this effect, incontrovertible. Unarguable. Clear. 
The President. Oh, yes, absolutely. We shared that information with the several different countries. 

Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters in Kennebunkport, Maine
June 29, 1991


The President. Heard that, but he's been lying so much. I hope like heck he's telling the truth this time. 
The President. Well, what I'm hearing is we've got our policy, and we've got to start doing a lot of diplomacy on this matter. It's very disturbing. And you heard the world reaction from this, so we're just considering, as I mentioned yesterday, what needs to be done. He must comply with United Nations resolutions. This concept of going in there and lying and shooting in the air to scare international observers is just something that cannot be condoned. 
Now, he did make some statement today, but I've heard that before. So, I want to see full implementation of those U.N. resolutions, and so does everybody else. We have a serious situation and this man -- I haven't changed my view about what it's going to take to have good relations with the United States. But this interim thing of keeping his word and then breaking it by harassing international inspectors is simply unacceptable to everybody. So, I'll leave it there. 
The President. I've said all I want to say about it. We will review the bidding and some diplomacy involved here. This is a U.N. resolution. That means there's a lot of people involved in it. But we feel that the authority exists for that under existing resolutions, 678 having been incorporated into the last resolution. So, it's a serious situation, it's not just one -- -- 
The President. I don't -- I'll just leave it where we are. 
The President. No question. No question about it. The intelligence is incontrovertible. And everybody that's seen it -- there's no dispute. I mean, this isn't even a question. And I think those in the United States and others that have seen the evidence are just convinced of it. I mean, it's visible; it's clear. 
The President. What I mean is we've got plenty of time to think everything over and a concerted international effort. The great success of Desert Storm was that the world opinion and the United Nations backing up world opinion or molding world opinion was very important. And this one -- I think you've already seen a worldwide reaction against this. But you have to do certain things, and we're taking the steps. 
The President. No, no. It doesn't surprise me in the wake of what's been going on since Desert Storm, either. 
The President. Sure, yes. 
The President. It makes it more difficult. Anytime you're cheating and lying and hiding complicates things. 
The President. I haven't discussed military option or any other option. I'm just leaving it where it is. And as I say, in our view, the United Nations resolutions, existing resolutions, clearly give sanction to that. But it's premature to discuss what might be done by the United States and others. We've got some consultation to do, just as we did leading up to Desert Storm on the diplomatic front. 
But it's a troubling matter, and there's no question about it. This isn't -- when you see their man standing up at the U.N. and lying, it just takes me back to where things were before they were wiped out on the battlefield. 
The President. Well, lots going on. I'm not, but we've set in train some diplomatic action, so there will be plenty of consultation today and in the future, Secretary Baker carrying the main responsibility for that as he did in diplomacy before. But we're in close touch with the situation, obviously, and concerned about it. 

The President's News Conference in Kennebunkport, Maine
July 1, 1991

On our one-on-one talk, if that's what you're referring to, I don't think we'll have that much time. I think we've got a couple of hours set aside—Bob? A couple of hours. But there's some issues that I need to talk about, global issues. And we've got a lot of things that we look at identically. And we can go back and talk about those, such as the United Nations action against Iraq's aggression and things like that

The President. Well, we're anxious to see what this inspection, this two-person team, gets when they come back. But let me say this: Everybody, everyone, knows that the man was cheating and lying. Everyone knows that he did that which the resolutions say not to do. And he should give unfettered access to these inspectors. He didn't do that. He surreptitiously moved the equipment. We've presented the evidence to certain parties. And all I'd say is he'd better get on with keeping his word, and he better get on with total, free, open inspection. 
And I said the other day, perhaps you missed it, that we are not foreclosing, nor putting on the table, any options at this point. We have a lot of diplomacy to do. We want to be sure that world opinion is as strong as I'm convinced it will be because this isn't a unilateral U.S. problem. This is a problem now of which the United Nations has seized, you see. 
The President. No, but others have been talking. I've not gone to the chiefs of state. I anticipate—maybe I indicated this the other day—that I will be doing that. High-level diplomatic initiatives will be called on, and decisions might follow. 
The President. No, Rita [Rita Beamish, Associated Press], to be honest with you, I haven't seen anything that makes me think it's calming down. I'm not sure I would have used the word agitated, but certainly concerned. And what we've got to have is evidence that full inspection on challenge will be granted. And I don't want to mislead you; I'm very concerned about this situation. This is a fundamental part of what the United Nations resolutions is about. So, there's still a feeling out there, on my view anyway, and I'm sure it's true of the neighbors, that he has to make this right and satisfy us or we'll figure out what else happens. 
The President. Well, again, I just keep resisting saying what we will do or what we won't do. But you've seen speculation, and I'll just steer you that it's not all warrantless. But on the other hand, I'm not saying what will be recommended that I do as President of the United States. I'm very interested in getting the views of other world leaders, and the diplomacy leading up to that has already started
I'll give you one other example. Martial law. We had some problems, you know-why martial law? And it was explained to me, many citizens over there against the law have weapons, many of them that were in opposition to the Kuwaiti regime, threatening, using the weapons, showing the weapons when the Iraqis were in power, now keeping the weapons. And they told me that martial law was essential if they were going to go in and disarm the people that had been helping the enemy


Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony for the Presidential Medals of Freedom and Presidential Citizen's Medals
July 3, 1991

Normally, the honors conferred today are given for a lifetime of service or near the end of a long career marked by distinction. But in Desert Storm we have, you see, a watershed event so unique, so singular given the history of the past half-century, that it is fitting, particularly before our day of independence, that we recognize now the exceptional service which was rendered by a special few. The events of August 2d, Iraq's brutal invasion of tiny Kuwait, thrust today's honorees into the midst of history. Some were center stage, some behind the scenes

Secretary Baker pursued every avenue to a diplomatic solution to this crisis, traveling tens of thousands of miles to seek any way possible to achieve Iraq's unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait. I think history, as we look back, will say that nowhere were his achievements more marked than at the United Nations. The U.N. Security Council adopted 12 resolutions dealing with the Gulf crisis including an historic, perhaps unprecedented resolution authorizing the use of force to expel Iraq from Kuwait.


Remarks at an Independence Day Celebration in Grand Rapids, Michigan
July 4, 1991

From the beginning, you felt the war up close. Crouton High grad Lieutenant Steven Harper was among the first, the first pilots in action over Iraq. The war hit home even more closely when your reservists left for the Gulf, citizen-soldiers from groups like the 180th Army National Guard from Grand Rapids and Greenville's 1073d ANG and your reservists from the 207th Evacuation Hospital. They helped care for those kids who were wounded in the Scud missile attacks. And I understand that in today's parade are families representing your other Reserve unit, Company A, 1st Battalion of the 24th Marines, which is still deployed overseas. Good, strong, decent men and women, all of them. They make us proud to be Americans. And God bless each and every one of them


Remarks on the London Economic Summit and an Exchange With Foreign Journalists
July 8, 1991

The President. No, I don't. And the reason I don't is that much of the legality of the steps we've taken came through international sanction, international will as expressed in 12 resolutions of the Security Council. And it was not ever the intent to march into Baghdad and to get bogged down in a guerrilla warfare in the city of Baghdad to accomplish that end. 
Now, how do I feel about Saddam Hussein today? Do I think he's a liar? Do I think he's broken his word over and over again? Yes. Will we ever have normal relations with this country as long as he's there? No. Will the sanctions be removed as long as there is this brutal treatment of his own people and violation of international law? No. 
But I don't think we can retroactively go back and take a look and say, well, the world community was wrong or certainly the United States should have unilaterally taken action, when you look at what taking action means. I listen to the crowd around here saying, let sanctions work. Sanctions are still on. Saddam Hussein would still be in Kuwait, if we adopted that policy. Sanctions are still on. And there's a lot of revisionistic thinking going on in the country, and I don't think that even given hindsight, that I would say we should have done something different because I don't know how you go about accomplishing that end. 
Now, perhaps the retention of these sanctions, given the pounding he's taken and given the fact that people see how much of a liar he's been on these nuclear things -- maybe that will facilitate change inside Iraq. He made a big mistake getting involved in trying to conceal capabilities for restoring -- or gaining a nuclear bomb, by restoring his nuclear capability. The world doesn't want this. The world sees it for what it is. And shooting over the heads of U.N. observers is a stupid thing to have done. 
But I wish I could answer affirmatively, but I wouldn't answer affirmatively to your question unless I could also now, in retrospect, foresee what would have been different. Because what I foresee would have been marching into Baghdad, coalition forces getting sniped at and maybe not finding Saddam Hussein, and being bogged down in an urban guerrilla warfare. 
And so, the critics now -- some of whom opposed our entry as a coalition into the war -- saying, well, you should have gone into Baghdad. And I say, yes, and do what; how? And we ought to ask that because it isn't that easy. I'm very proud of the fact that we, when provoked -- or put it this way -- when the Kurds were brutalized and fled, the United States and France and Germany on the east, and England, particularly, Canada, a lot of countries responded, did something. That's good; it's humanitarian. But to reconstruct it from the beginning and to say, hey, you were wrong to get into this in the first place -- no, we were right. And to say, as some in this country have done, those who were my severest critics, some of them in the beginning, hey, you should have marched into Baghdad -- I don't see it. I don't think that General Schwarzkopf or General Powell sees it either. I'm not sure that our coalition force leaders would see it. Do I wish he were out of there? You bet, you bet.
The President. No, I can't talk about anything other than to just say the options are open. I'm a great believer, as we think we established during the war, of international agreement on this. Never forget that the thing that was significant in all of the coalition activities was the fact that there was broad international agreement. It wasn't the superpower United States acting on its own. It was Canada in partnership; it was a lot of countries that aren't going to be sitting around at the G - 7 in cooperation. So, I can't help you on anything of that nature, except to say we take it very, very seriously. 
I'm told that there is some -- quote -- "good news" -- unquote -- coming out of Baghdad today. I haven't seen it, but wherein Saddam once again states that he will fully cooperate and have inspectors. Well, let's see whether that can work before we have to go further with options.

Remarks on the Termination of Economic Sanctions Against South Africa and a News Conference
July 10, 1991

The President. The answer to your questions are nope and yep. No, I am not convinced that it's total. And yes, I do feel that there's still reason to believe that he is hiding and has not come totally clean. 
Now, do I view this step favorably, his confessing to that which he has denied over and over again? Yes, I think that's progress. But we will be watching this very carefully. I've been having consultations with leaders -- already two major leaders around the world, Mulroney yesterday, Mubarak today. I'll be talking to others in the next day or two about this Iraq situation. 
And I am anticipating a unanimous view that we've got to keep our eyes wide open and not be lulled by some letter or some very belated offering from Saddam Hussein that he is now willing to do that which he should have done a long time ago. So, I've very skeptical, but I would have to say that the letter is progress. And I am convinced that the coalition and the major countries that we've been dealing with on this will be looking at the problem the same way I am. 
When you're dealing with nuclear, when you're dealing with proliferation of nuclear in the area, that is a subject that really gets people's attention. Some other deviation by Saddam Hussein might have been less uniting of coalition forces and other forces around the world. But when you're dealing with hiding and cheating and lying on nuclear matters, I think almost every country is very, very concerned. 
The President. I certainly -- put it this way -- I'm hopeful that he got the message because we're deadly serious. And I do still believe, Jim [Jim Miklaszewski, NBC News], that part of the massive miscalculation last year was, one, he didn't believe it and, two, he believed that if we did, hypothetically, if use of force would come, that he in some way would prevail. And I think he's disabused now on both points. 
So, I would hope that our enhanced credibility that I keep referring to, along with the enhanced credibility of our supportive allies, might have made the difference in this instance. But I wish I could tell you I felt it was all done. 
The President. Well, I think we took out a lot of Iraq's nuclear capability when our bombers were flying. The question is how do you -- how can you certify, when your objective is to get Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait, that you have also taken care of this collateral and very important problem? And I don't think that we -- I think we can certify that the program has been set back a long, long ways. 
I couldn't help but think back to those dreadful days of debate and turmoil in this country before the successful conclusion of Desert Storm, with many thinking when we talked about an Iraqi nuclear capability that we were just throwing up that as a smokescreen to try to enhance our action or to give us another reason for which to act against this tyrant. And now people are saying, hey, they may have been on to something here. And so, it wasn't an objective to destroy that, but it worked out that we did take out a great deal of his nuclear capability. 
The problem is that under the latest resolutions, second-to-last resolution I believe it is, 679 of the United Nations -- looking for help here and not getting any -- [laughter] -- that under that resolution it is very clear that this should all be abandoned. And he said, I don't have any of this. Then we show him through briefing of the United Nations Security Council that he's got it. "Oh, yes, but, well, I've been obfuscating" -- I don't know how you say that in Arabic -- [laughter] -- but he's been obfuscating, which I say is lying, and then comes forward and says here is what I'm going to do. So, we're certainly skeptical about this. 
The President. No. But we are going to try to be able to assure the world that it is all gone. But when you're burying component parts off in the desert somewhere, in somebody's attic or somebody's basement in downtown Baghdad, if that's what's happening, it is pretty hard to certify that. But what we want to do is set up a mechanism so whenever there's any evidence of intelligence that is even a hint of his violation of these U.N. resolutions, we must be satisfied, the international community must be satisfied, the U.N. must be satisfied that that equipment has been destroyed. 
So, what's happened is that once again through these incidents it has been pointed out that he'll go to any end to do those things which he's not supposed to do. I again come back to the letter, hope it's positive. But it's like Missouri -- show me. I'm from Missouri; we've got to see exactly what's going on. 
The President. No. No, I don't see any room to reason with him as long as he is in violation of any of these -- I'll put it this way -- as long as any of the United Nations sanctions remain unfulfilled. And even beyond that, I don't think, given his total lack of any kind of -- put it this way -- I don't think that his behavior merits any kind of formal treatment by the United States, or informal treatment. We cannot have normal relations with Iraq -- normal relations -- as long as this man is in power. 
And for my part, I want to see the economic sanctions kept on. I keep going back to the "let sanctions work" -- do you remember that cry? If we had let sanctions work back there, we would have had the coalition fall apart and the main objective would have been totally unmet. That man would still be sitting in Kuwait and would have been threatening further -- who knows what he would have been doing to Saudi Arabia? So, he's still there. And he's there with a bloodier hand. And we will not have normal relations as long as he's there. But we are determined to continue to work through the United Nations to see these resolutions fulfilled. 
And let me add another one, because I now sense a little hue and cry going up in some quarters about food and medicine. The United Nations resolutions provide for being able to ship food and medicine into this country. What it doesn't provide for is having food shipped in there and then sent off to the Baath Party cadres up in Tikrit. It doesn't provide for taking the food out of the mouths of the hungry children or the medicine away from the people and giving it to the army. And once again, this whole diversion is another reason that I feel as strongly as I do that there will not be normal relations with Saddam Hussein ever again. 
But again, I'd like to repeat what I said before the war started: Our argument is not with the people of Iraq. It's not even with other leaders in Iraq. We'd be perfectly willing to give the military another chance, provided Saddam Hussein was out of there and representations were made to the rest of the world as their willingness to abide by these U.N. resolutions and play by international law. But they're not willing -- under Saddam Hussein, it is most unlikely that any will ever believe him if he says that. 
So, that's where we are. And I'm very concerned about it. And I still feel, as I said at a question yesterday, that certainly setting back that aggression on itself -- the objective, the main objective of the United Nations was worth it. But there are these residual problems that concern me, of course. 

The President's News Conference With French President Francois Mitterrand in Rambouillet, France
July 14, 1991

President Bush. I just have not seen the statement, but if it's as you've phrased it, I would support his statement. We are together in the way we're looking at this situation in Iraq -- the situation I'm referring to being Saddam Hussein's continuation of lying and trying to go forward with some nuclear capability. And that is a cause for alarm all over the world. And I don't like to talk about a statement I have not seen, but after a discussion with President Mitterrand, I am confident that France and the United States once again are looking at this important matter in the same way

President Bush. Mr. President, as much as he addressed the question to me, might I just finish just a little bit? 
There have been incontrovertible evidence presented to the United Nations Security Council that the man is lying and cheating. There were rumors that force might be used. Shortly after that, Saddam Hussein came forward and said essentially this: I have been lying and cheating. I have been doing things that I heretofore said I have not been doing, but now I'm not going to do them anymore. And I think it is very important to the security of the whole region, indeed to the world, that he not do them any more: that he not go forward with a nuclear program, that he comply with each and every United Nations resolution. 
So, that's what this is all about. And let us hope that his last confession, or his last statement that he would comply is followed to the letter and to the T. I can tell you I am still, in spite of that, very much concerned about his intentions, with reason. I'm not just thinking that way; I have evidence to back that up
President Bush. You put it in a straight way, and I'll put the answer in a rather circuitous way. The United States will not have improved nor normalized relations with Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein is in power. I will not have our people voting to lift sanctions as long as he is in power. 
He is hurting his people. Before the war started I made very clear, over and over again, that our argument was not with the people of Iraq -- it wasn't even with the regime in Iraq -- it was with Saddam Hussein. I had a chance to talk to President Mitterrand on this and get his views. And my view remains that the best thing that could happen would be for him to step aside and let us all begin with whoever took his place to try to have improved relations. That would mean, of course, full and total compliance to every "t" and every "i" in the U.N. resolutions. 
But that's the way to bring relief to the people of Iraq. We're sending food over there, and the food gets diverted by this brutal man to support his army or to support the people in Takrit. And world opinion is getting sick and tired of it. So, they can sort that out at home, but I can state the position of the United States.

Exchange With Reporters in London, United Kingdom
July 15, 1991

The President. Well, I was just asking what the press interest was in. And tonight at our dinner, the Secretary, having covered Yugoslavia and a lot of other issues at the Foreign Minister level -- we talked about the Iraq situation and we talked mainly about conventional arms control or how the various participants in the G - 7 could show their keen interest in arms control. We didn't go into the details of START or anything of that nature


The President's New Conference in London, United Kingdom
July 17, 1991

But let me give you another example coming at it in a different way. Iraq used to have a very special relationship with the Soviet Union, and yet the Soviet Union, I think, was very helpful in the United Nations in standing up against Iraq. It showed a shift. So, I think they've demonstrated an ability to shift. But I think your point is -- well, I think your point is well-taken because it's very hard to ask the American people, please spend money, send checks when this one dictatorship 80 miles from our shores is being propped up.

But clearly, I've said before and I'll say it here again, we don't want to go -- we're not any Lone Ranger out there. We think we have authorities under the United Nations resolutions to do what's needed to be done, but I am hopeful that it can be done without force. But if they continue to lie, if they continue to harbor equipment that could lead to development of nuclear weapons in direct contravention of their obligations, then we have to review our options. But it wasn't discussed in that manner today.

The President. I think they made clear they hope that force would not be used. But that's quite -- they were in that mode back early on in the Iraq days. I'm not suggesting they want to use force. I'm not suggesting I do. And I think it would be very important to work cooperatively with them again. But we've got too much hypothesis here. I'm just hoping now that Iraq will totally reveal their hidden capabilities. And I'm a little suspcious, very candidly. I haven't seen anything to allay my concerns


The President's News Conference With Greek Prime Minister Constantinos Mitsotakis in Athens, Greece
July 18, 1991

The President. Well, I'm sure they must have if we're still turning up evidence that the Iraqi dictator is still trying to perfect some nuclear capability. And clearly, there's no question that the nuclear capability was set back in the war, but that's not the point. The point is he must fully comply with the United Nations resolutions. And he's been lying and cheating and hiding material, and that simply is not good enough. And the whole world is very much concerned about it. They do not want to have nuclear weapons in the hands of this kind of aggressor


Toast at a State Dinner in Ankara, Turkey
July 20, 1991

Let me add, sir, that our respect and gratitude certainly extends also to Turkey's military leaders -- the Turkish General Staff -- who displayed uncommon dedication to the coalition's objectives. It was a comfort for all of us in Washington to know that when the United Nations decided to take that step and impose sanctions against Iraq, Turkey would not hesitate to do what was right. I want you to know -- and on this one I speak confidently on behalf of the American people -- that Turkey's role in the Gulf crisis has not, and will not be, forgotten.


The President's News Conference With Turkish President Turgut Ozal in Ankara, Turkey
July 20, 1991

President Bush. Are you speaking to me or to President Ozal? Yes, it's a matter of concern to us. Anytime there's a conflagration of that nature it's a matter of concern to us. I understand that the matter is, hopefully, getting resolved. But we moved in when the Kurds were brutalized -- great cooperation from Turkey and other countries. It was not a unilateral move. We have subsequently removed our forces from the area. But I think that the parties there realize that our role is for peace. And anytime there's an outbreak of hostilities it concerns us. 
I don't think, if the question implies that we're going back to what we were when the war ended and major, massive attacks were launched against the Kurds, that we're seeing something like that taking place here.
Let me say that the rapid deployment force is to guard against a repeat of horribly brutal events in the north. And we are not anticipating that that force will be used. We are thinking that Saddam Hussein, having learned his lesson once, will hopefully not embark on the kind of carnage that resulted in our having to do what we did in the past with Turkish cooperation. 
So, I would not anticipate, John [John Cochran, NBC News], seeing those forces have to come into action. But should there be a need in the south, different assets would be used
President Bush. One, I'd like to see him out of there -- Saddam Hussein. Two, we will not have normal relations with the United States [Iraq] as long as he's in there. Three, it was never an objective of the United Nations under these many resolutions -- 12 resolutions -- to get him out of office. The resolution was to get him out of Kuwait. And with the help of Turkey and other countries, we were fantastically successful there. 
But what he's doing now to his own people by diverting food away from his own populace into the hands of some special interests there, and what he's doing now in his ongoing quest to start forward on some nuclear program -- although he now says he's not doing that -- but what he has done is very bad and counterproductive, as he tries to hide the remnants of his tattered defense forces. 
And so, I see nothing redeeming in his attitude or in the way he has conducted himself. I see it as a clear case of evil versus good -- and he's the evil in this one. And yet, it wasn't an objective -- and I would say this to some who think it should have been -- to remove him from power. We would not have gotten the international sanction from all these resolutions and all these countries if that had been an objective. And so, I am hopeful that he will leave. 
And let me just repeat this right here in this country. I said long before the first shot was fired that our argument was not with the people of Iraq, nor was it with the Iraq military -- the establishment. It is with Saddam Hussein, who runs that country with an iron fist, without regard to the feelings of his own people. And it's still that way. And if some way they could get him to step aside and get out of there, we, for the United States' part, would be willing to start right in from scratch. No matter who the person is, what the establishment is, we want pledges that they would honor these United Nations resolutions. But that's the way we feel about it
President Bush. It affects it by peaceful negotiation. It affects it because in the defeat of Iraq's aggression, we set a new moral tone: aggression is not going to stand. And so, now we want to build on that. We set it by using the United Nations in an unprecedented way -- I say we -- not the United States -- Turkey and every other country, coming together under international law, acting under the rubric of the United Nations Security Council resolutions


Remarks at a Dinner Hosted By President Turgut Ozal in Istanbul, Turkey
July 21, 1991

Then came Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, an act that defied all that the United States and Turkey stand for, an act that exposed your entire region -- this entire region -- to brutal aggression. Turkey's response as a key member of the international coalition stands as a tribute to the leadership of President Ozal, to the professionalism of the Turkish military, and to the great heart of the Turkish people. 
All during the world's effort to use diplomacy to get Iraq's brutal dictator to remove his forces from Kuwait and then all during Desert Shield and Desert Storm, President Ozal and I were in constant touch. There was no individual in any country that was more resolute, more determined to see international law prevail. And once the decision was made to use force -- difficult decision that it was -- no ally was more solid than Turkey, no leader more staunch than your President, President Ozal. 
Our work as friends, allies, and coalition partners continues today. Our two nations are part of a newly formed residual force stationed near Turkey's border with Iraq. And all of us understand this force will not stay permanently. But we also understand the importance of sending a strong, unmistakable signal to Saddam Hussein: He must not resume war against his own people.

Remarks at the Departure Ceremony in Istanbul, Turkey
July 22, 1991

We pledged to expand the military cooperation that helped liberate Kuwait. And our administration supports Turkey's priority objective of military force modernization, including its 160-plane F - 16 development program. We stand side-by-side in maintaining an international force to preserve stability on your southeastern frontier. And in that spirit, I'm pleased to announce that the United States will provide $1 million to Turkish villages along the Iraqi border that suffered economic losses during the refugee crisis.


Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Cabinet Meeting
July 23, 1991

The President. Limited oil sales by Iraq.
The President. Well, it might well be, now that it's been raised here -- [laughter] -- what our position is on that, and -- we've talked out there at the U.N., as you know, and my view is the U.N. mechanism is clear in terms of helping children and those who may be threatened with either famine or disease. 
The machinery is in place there and it's very clear that Saddam Hussein has not complied with the U.N. resolution, so we'll see what we can do. 
We're not trying to hurt any individuals there. Our argument is not with the women and children of Iraq; it's with the dictator. He has not made restitutions regarding the Kuwaiti people that are held, of Kuwaiti gold that is held -- total disclosure on possible nuclear developments, and so there's much to be done. 
But the United States is not going to see suffering of innocent women and children there. There's all kinds of mechanisms available for him to take care of it -- his own resources inside the country, the possible release of resources outside of the country -- and it's a matter that's being discussed at the United Nations. 
I had a good discussion this morning with Prince Sadruddin Khan, who is doing some fine work on this question. But we haven't resolved yet, and I need to talk to -- here, we have not resolved yet exactly what we're going to do at the United Nations. 
The President. That's all I'm going to say about it right now. I hope you'll understand, Helen [Helen Thomas, United Press International]


Remarks Following Discussions With President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe
July 24, 1991

I believe your stature worldwide will continue to grow. I remember congratulating you in 1982 at that marvelous state dinner in your homeland for Zimbabwe's election to the United Nations Security Council. Earlier this year, Zimbabwe's leadership as President of that Council was critical to the success of the coalition's efforts to enforce U.N. resolutions against Iraqi aggression.

President Bush. -- -- stick to the -- deadline -- no comment on that right now. Don't -- playing that up too much, but they know what they have to do.


Remarks at the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Church Annual Convention in Arlington, Virginia
July 25, 1991

In Iraq, we confronted a country under the rule of a man of brutal means and, in my view, unmitigated evil -- a man who made war on his own people, menaced his neighbor, and threatened the world's peace. 
I believed then -- and I believe now -- that what we and our coalition partners did to stand up against Saddam Hussein's aggression was right; it was just; it was moral. And we did theright thing. Who can doubt this now, knowing as we do just how close Saddam Hussein was to possessing nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them against defenseless men, women, and children. 
We fought not for a narrow interest but for a noble ideal. And we fought to liberate a nation, to defeat an aggressor who brought misery -- who brings it still -- to many millions of innocent people. I've said over and over again, and I'll repeat it here today: We have no quarrel at all -- none -- with the people of Iraq. But Iraq will not realize its potential as a nation -- rejoining the family of nations -- so long as Saddam Hussein stays in power.



Remarks and an Exchange With Soviet Journalists on the Upcoming Moscow Summit
July 25, 1991

And Iraq, we may have some differences is how we look at it. But the main thing is we came together at the U.N. on the major common goal: this aggression will not stand. And the Soviet Union at the last minute had a couple of ideas of a peace conference or peace talk just before military force was used. But that's fine. I mean, so did a lot of other people have those ideas. But once the battle was joined, the Soviet Union stayed with the U.N. position and the U.N. resolutions. And so, I will be looking at that and thanking people there for that support

The President. There's been a kind of heightened view that after -- almost got it back to the January 15th deadline in terms of using force. And I think that's gotten a little out of hand. I mean, the United States is not going to go off like some cowboy, six-guns shooting in the air because the 25th of July has gone by. But we are going to do is be damned sure one way or another that Saddam Hussein does not continue to lie and does not continue to go against the U.N. resolutions. 
And he has not restituted the gold from Kuwait. He has not fully accounted for the people from Kuwait. He continues to do bad things in terms of pursuing nuclear objectives. And there is a whole other list of things that he -- he diverts food away from the people into certain hierarchies. And that's not any good. 
But I think there's been a heightened kind of feeling -- well, on the 25th, we'd better batten down the hatches over there because this man is going to be punished. He may get punished someday. And we have got to enforce these United Nations sanctions and resolutions. But I'm just trying to put that 25th of July into a proper perspective. We have expected full disclosure. And I'll be interested to see on the 26th of July what my experts tell me about whether there's been full disclosure. But I wouldn't read too much into it as a day that we -- that military action is taken. 
I think the very fact that there was some rather strong feeling from a lot of countries that military action might be taken if he doesn't comply resulted in his coming forward and say, oh, all the things I told you I wasn't doing yesterday, yes, I am doing them. But here's the answer, here's the disclosure. The problem is the disclosure is not full and he's got to comply. 
And so, all we want to do is have him keep his word and stop brutalizing his own people by diverting food away from them and medicines. But I think -- I'm still hopeful that he will do that, very candidly -- still hopeful. But I can't guarantee it from what I've seen so far.




Remarks at the Moscow State Institute for International Relations
July 30, 1991

But the crowning proof that we are overcoming the old cold war animosities remains our cooperation in the Persian Gulf. In the depths of the cold war era, Iraq's aggression against its tiny neighbor might well have brought our two nations -- even the entire world -- to the brink of conflict. Instead, our cooperation ensured the international isolation of Saddam Hussein. And if Saddam Hussein thought he could exploit our differences to his own advantage -- he was dead wrong. At every key point in the crisis, the United States and the Soviet Union worked together to send a strong and steady signal to Saddam that his aggression would not stand


The President's News Conference With Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow
July 31, 1991

But in my view, other countries do possess nuclear weapons. It's not just the Soviet Union and the United States. And I do believe that we are on theright path by the path that President Gorbachev has outlined today on following on existing agreements. So, rather than try to have a ethereal or a utopian answer, let's follow through practically, as he suggested. And then as far as the U.S. is concerned, I'd like us to go forward with a system that puts nobody at threat, nobody at risk. The only thing at risk is an errant nuclear missile aiming at a country. And that's why I support the defensive approach, and that's why I think one of the lessons out of the Iraq war -- and maybe President Gorbachev reads this differently -- is that defenses work. And though we're talking about a different concept now, an expanded concept, a more high-tech concept, I think a lot of lives were saved by defense. So, that's my reply


The President's News Conference
August 2, 1991
The President. Today, August 2, provides an opportunity for all Americans to reflect upon the past year. It was just 12 months ago today that Saddam Hussein, lacking provocation or cause, ordered an attack upon Iraq's small and defenseless neighbor, Kuwait. What followed, the world now knows, was a nightmare of brutal occupation, a nightmare that only came to an end several months ago. What liberated Kuwait was an unprecedented effort, one that brought together most of the international community, initially in support of sanctions, ultimately in support of military force, and always consistent with the principles and resolutions of the United Nations. 
Our task has not ended. We must ensure that Iraq complies fully with all U.N. resolutions and eliminates its weapons of mass destruction. And we must work to reintegrate Iraq and its people into the region once the Iraqi people choose new leadership. 
The President. I think the Soviets are as interested as anybody else in seeing Iraq comply fully with the United Nations resolutions. I did have a chance to discuss at the meeting we had outside of Moscow the feelings that I've expressed here and that I've expressed before about the need to change Iraq's leadership, the fact that there will not be normalized relations with the United States, anyway, as long as Saddam Hussein is in power. 
But I want to keep repeating, Charles [Charles Bierbauer, Cable News Network], this -- look, the argument isn't with the people of Iraq; the argument isn't with the other leaders in Iraq. The argument is with Saddam Hussein. If the military talked him into stepping aside and getting out of there, I'd give them a real break as far as U.S. policy goes. I'd start over and say, all right, now you prove to us that you want to live within the family of nations peacefully. You show me now that you're going to comply with these resolutions, and we're going to give you every benefit of the doubt. So, the argument still is with Saddam Hussein, and I don't know of one single defender that he has anywhere around the world anymore. 
The President. That's the third question, and we don't know. It's a good question, though. What we do is keep pressing for full implementation of these resolutions. Look, it's not all negative. There has been some compliance. I continue to feel, based on good evidence, that they are hiding information, that they are begrudgingly giving up information, and so I would callupon them to be far more cooperative than they've been. 
The President. I think without going into some confidential talks, to paraphrase, I think he's hopeful that that wouldn't even be necessary, that Iraq would comply. I'm not as relaxed on it. 

The President's News Conference in Kennebunkport, Maine, on the Attempted Coup in the Soviet Union
August 20, 1991

It is ironic that only a handful of countries, predictably extreme countries, have supported what's happening in Moscow. I think of Libya, I think of Iraq, and I think of Cuba. These are renegades. These are people that have been swimming against the tide of democracy. The rest of the world appears to be very upset with this usurpation of power


Exchange With Reporters in Kennebunkport, Maine
August 22, 1991

Now, if you ask me has Boris Yeltsin's stature been enhanced, the answer is clearly yes. But this jumping on Gorbachev, who was taken and held under house arrest with his wife and grandchild, I'm simply not going to be a part of that nor a part of second-guessing all that. They've got procedures there that they've now put into effect in terms of investigating all of this. What business, what possible good could come from the President of the United States trying to sort all that out? Let the system sort it out. All I know is that he was committed to reform, he had the support of Yeltsin, and he had the support of the President of the United States and every other leader around except Iraq, Cuba, and Libya. And that's good enough for me. We're on theright side of that one


The President's News Conference
September 12, 1991
This is a friendship backed up with real support. Just months ago, American men and women in uniform risked their lives to defend Israelis in the face of Iraqi Scud missiles. And indeed, Desert Storm, while winning a war against aggression, also achieved the defeat of Israel's most dangerous adversary. And during the current fiscal year alone and despite our own economic problems, the United States provided Israel with more than $4 billion in economic and military aid, nearly $1,000 for every Israeli man, woman and child, as well as with $400 million in loan guarantees to facilitate emigrant absorption.

We've got to keep our sights on the broad picture of peace in the Middle East. And I would say that includes world peace. They're so closely interlocked when you look at the complex relationships in the Middle East and how they spill over into Europe and to Asia, and to the Soviet Union still. So, we're talking about a major chance now for one more tremendous step towards peace. We've seen the evolution in the Soviet Union. And we've seen the defeat of aggression over there in Iraq. We've seen democracy on the move in our hemisphere. And here is a last place that really needs this peace process to go forward


The President's News Conference With Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany
September 16, 1991

The President. Let me simply add to that: I totally agree with that. It is essential that Saddam Hussein comply with the United Nations resolutions that have been passed. And he is now, once again, going against those resolutions. And working closely with others, we now must make a determination as to what to do about this


Exchange With Reporters at the Grand Canyon, Arizona
September 18, 1991

The President. A long time ago.


Exchange With Reporters at the Grand Canyon, Arizona on the Situation in Iraq
September 18, 1991

The President. No, no, there's no deadline, but I'm thinking about seeing the will of the international community complied with. And it's so clear what he has to do. So, we're just doing what's right here. And there's no threats; there's just determination, that's all there is, firm determination that he will comply to the letter of the U.N. resolutions. 
And it's not just the United States; a lot of other countries feel this way, too. 
The President. I don't think Saddam wants any of that. I don't think he does. I'm confident he doesn't, absolutely confident. 
The President. Yes. 
The President. Well, it depends what `action" is, but yes, I'm confident -- -- 
The President. Well, I'm confident that the international community will be with us in whatever is done. But there's no -- we're not in a threatening mode here. This isn't what this is all about. So -- -- 
The President. There have been some contacts. I personally have -- I don't want to say haven't, I have had what I would call limited contact on that with foreign leaders so far. But it's not -- no, but it's not all -- we're not into this kind of emergency mode here. 
The President. I don't believe it will come to that, and I don't think you do, and I don't think the Defense Department does. So, this is what we would call prudent planning. 
The President. I think it's a safeguard. I mean, they just don't want to feel threatened. 
The President. I don't think they feel threatened now. 
The President. Their civilian populace was pummeled by this reckless man, and they just don't need to go through it anymore. But that's quite different than the story that came out this morning; I'll say no more about that one, but just take your guidance from what General Scowcroft said and what the Pentagon will be saying or maybe has said by now, and what I've just told you here. That's what it is. If somebody tried to make more out of it they're making a big mistake; they're doing something that is wrong. 
The President. Well, we finished the job in compliance with the United Nations resolutions, which was to set back the aggressor, get him out of Kuwait. That was the job. And that was finished. Now, if there's something starting up again, there's another part of -- I might have to take that back a little, Ellen, [Ellen Warren, Knight-Ridder] because there's another part of the job. The original part of the job was to put an end to the aggression. That was done, and done with total finality, and done beautifully. 
Now there's some other United Nations resolutions that have not been complied with. One of them has to do with his trying to go forward with or trying to conceal any weaponry that comes under the resolutions. And so, the job is unfinished in this sense, that we are going to do our part, along with other countries, to see that he does comply with these resolutions. 
So, maybe I answered a little too quickly in the beginning. 
The President. Only what General Scowcroft has referred to, and I don't think it will come to that. I think the man will see that we are very serious about this, and he will do what he should have done in the first place, disclose and comply. 
The President. Oh, yes, I'm plenty fedup. I'm plenty fedup with him. 
The President. That's right. He's a very difficult fellow, as we've all seen. Very difficult. But we intend to see that these resolutions are complied with. He's not going to question ourresolve on this. I mean, he may be testing and probing here and there, but he knows better than to take on the United States of America in this regard. 
So, there's no point threatening. We just do a couple of things and then make certain demands, and we think they'll be complied with. 

Remarks at a Republican Party Fundraising Dinner in Salt Lake City, Utah
September 18, 1991

There's something remiss when you can push Iraq out of Kuwait but we can't push a good bill out of the United States Congress. [Laughter] And here's how Republicans define a good bill: not by dollars spent and redtape created but by lives enriched and families strengthened. And you see, I think there should be one question in every decision that comes before a President, comes before Members of the United States Congress. And it should be: Does this strengthen the American family? Whether it's in terms of keeping Americans on the job or ensuring that they live in a safe, clean environment or guaranteeing a quality education for our kids, we must do absolutely everything we can to preserve and strengthen the American family.


Exchange on the Situation in Iraq With Hispanic Journalists in Los Angeles, California
September 19, 1991

The President. At this juncture the answer to your question is, no, I don't think so. I do think that Saddam Hussein must comply willingly or reacting to pressure with the United Nations resolutions. There is too much at stake. The international community has too much at stake. The very meaning of a new world order with the U.N. playing an active role in it has too much at stake. The United States has a disproportionate responsibility for this. We do the heavy lifting. We're the only ones that can. And we saw that clearly when your sons and daughters went off to that war in the Gulf. 
We don't need lots of troops and to mobilize a whole "Son of Desert Storm" operation. The way to diffuse it is for Saddam Hussein to do what the U.N. is calling on him to do. One way to have him to do is to understand that if he doesn't, he is going to find that we are prepared to use military action to see that he does comply. And we're not going to be doing this alone if it comes to that. We'll have others with us. 
But to allay the concerns of America, I would simply say we're not talking about massive troop movements. What we are talking about, if required -- and if you ask me whether I thought it will be or not, I'd say, no -- what we are talking about is accompanying helicopters with some air power. And we got a lot of air power there. 
And we've demonstrated, thanks to our technology and to the ability of our pilots, that we can be very specific as we apply this air power. And so, I'm glad you asked that because there's a lot of interest in the country, and a lot think that we're talking about a massive mobilization. I saw one of the networks interviewing some families down at Shaw Air Force Base, "Oh, please, we don't want to go through this again." That's not what we're talking about here. And I don't see it escalating that we would be talking about it. 
But I will say this: I am determined that he comply with these resolutions. And when a President makes a statement like that, he ought not to do it without being willing to back that up. And I think the reason we ended up having the war in the first place was twofold. One, Saddam Hussein never believed we'd use power. He just didn't believe it. He listened to the debate in this country. He read the editorials. He'd misread a sign, and he didn't believe it. And the second miscalculation was, he believed that if we did use power, he didn't think we would, but he believed that if we did, that he would prevail either by a standoff emerging as the new Nasser or in some way beating us. He had no idea what was going to happen to him. 
That's now history. He knows what we can do. And so, it is my gut feeling that he will do that which he should have done long ago, and that is comply with the letter of the United Nations resolutions. 
And I would just like to take this opportunity to say to him through your outlets: He should comply. He should not miscalculate again. And we don't need to threaten. That's all we have to say: You ought to comply. And I've never been more determined. And he can interpret it any way he wants to. 
The President. No, no deadlines. Just a simple statement of determination in which I'm sure I would be joined by countries all around the world. I mean, this isn't just the United States. Just as the strength of Operation Desert Storm came from the fact that it had an international sanction, his compliance and demand for compliance comes not just from the United States but from the Security Council of the U.N. 
So, there's no deadline, no lines in the sand. Just to say: Hey, go ahead and do what you ought to have done some time ago.

Remarks at a Fundraising Dinner for Senator John Seymour in Los Angeles, California
September 19, 1991

It was a fine moment for our country. It turned things around. And let me just say I am confident that what happened then will be the guarantor that we don't have to do all that again. I believe, no matter how bad he is, Saddam Hussein is not going to miscalculate once more. He's not going to do that. And we are going to stay firm as we can be the way I spelled out the policy yesterday. It isn't going to change one single bit. And he is going to comply with every single resolution of the United Nations.

We live at a time of just extraordinary change, at a moment in history when old gives way to the new. In August 1990, the world's attention was riveted on Iraq. And this August, the epicenter of change shifted over to Moscow and to the rest of the Soviet Union. And what began as the Old Guard's attempt to turn back the clock ended up as the last gasp of a dying ideology. And the coup failed, and communism stood exposed and empty at its core. I was very pleased when both Yeltsin and Gorbachev gave the United States credit for standing firmly with them, thus helping to guarantee the coup's failure.

Exchange With Reporters on an Unemployment Benefits Bill
September 23, 1991

The President. I've been working on unemployment benefits this morning. Been on the telephone. And we strongly support Bob Dole's package, which is budgetarily sound, forward-looking, takes care of those that really need help. So, I've been focusing on that this morning and calling several Senators about it, and I just hope that the Senate will do what's needed, and that is help these people, but also do something that is budgetarily sound, and that is -- where we have offsets and we stay within the budget agreement. So, that's what I've been concentrating on.


Address to the 46th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 1991

In a world defined by change, we must be as firm in principle as we are flexible in our response to changing international conditions. That's especially true today of Iraq. Six months after the passage of U.N. Security Council Resolutions 687 and 688, Saddam continues to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and subject the Iraqi people to brutal repression. Saddam's contempt for U.N. resolutions was first demonstrated back in August of 1990. And it continues even as I am speaking. His government refuses to permit unconditional helicopter inspections and right now is refusing to allow U.N. inspectors to leave inspected premises with documents relating to an Iraqi nuclear weapons program. 
And it is the United States view that we must keep the United Nations sanctions in place as long as he remains in power. And this also shows that we cannot compromise for a moment in seeing that Iraq destroys all of its weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. And we will not compromise. 
This is not to say, and let me be clear on this one, that we should punish the Iraqi people. Let me repeat, our argument has never been with the people of Iraq. It was and is with a brutal dictator whose arrogance dishonors the Iraqi people. Security Council Resolution 706 created a responsible mechanism for sending humanitarian relief to innocent Iraqi citizens. We must put that mechanism to work. 
We must not abandon our principled stand against Saddam's aggression. This cooperative effort has liberated Kuwait, and now it can lead to a just government in Iraq. And when it does, when it does, the Iraqi people can look forward to better lives, free at home, free to engage in a world beyond their borders.

Exchange With Reporters in New York City
September 24, 1991

The President. Iraq ought to simply comply with the United Nations resolutions. That's what they ought to do. 
The President. We want to see all the -- the resolution -- -- 
The President. We want to see everything implemented as best it can be, and that's our position, one of the principal positions we take with the United Nations.



Remarks Following Discussions With Amir Jabir al-Ahmad al-Jabir al-Sabah of Kuwait
October 1, 1991

The President. We've just had a very successful meeting with the Amir. And we stand together in ourresolve that Iraq comply fully with all the United Nations Security Council resolutions so that it can never again pose a threat to Kuwait and all the nations of the region. 
In particular, the Amir and I strongly condemn Iraq's refusal to free the many Kuwaitis that are still held in Iraq. And we call again for their immediate and unconditional release. And we reaffirm our view that United Nations sanctions must remain in place against Iraq until a new leadership emerges in Baghdad, a leadership willing to live in peace with its neighbors and its own people.


The President's News Conference
October 4, 1991
The President. Well, I've got in mind all along what I said is that I'd like to see Saddam Hussein out of there so we could have more normalized relations. Our argument is not with the people; never has been; never was at the height of the war. And I made that very, very clear as we went along. And so it is with Saddam Hussein, who is continuing to brutalize his own people. And that's just the way it's going to be. 
The President. Well, I'll have to review. You're getting me with the context not quite so clear in my mind. But if there's any question about wanting Saddam Hussein out of there, let me reiterate, we want him out. And if there's any question that it would benefit the people of Iraq, let me lay that one aside. It would be of great benefit to the people of Iraq and the United States. And most of the other countries I know are going to keep these economic sanctions on until there's dramatic change there. And we're going to still continue under the U.N. resolution to permit the sale of oil, properly supervised, so that the funds from that go to the people, in terms of food and medicine. So that's policy


Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for Amir 'Isa Khalifa of Bahrain
October 15, 1991

In a few minutes, we'll begin our meetings, building on the common ground we share. And let me focus now on our approach to Iraq, and let me state our position in the simplest possible terms. Saddam Hussein will not scorn the will of the world. Iraq must never again threaten its neighbors. We will keep the pressure on until we are satisfied that all of Saddam's weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them have been destroyed, until a new leadership in Iraq stands ready to live in peace with its neighbors. 
Your Highness, as leader of a country that knows too well what it means to be menaced by Saddam, I know you join me in looking ahead to the day Iraq closes this sad chapter in its history and joins the cause of peace. I've said many times, and I'll repeat it here, that our quarrel has never been with the people of Iraq. The United States, in concert with the United Nations, has proposed a comprehensive program allowing Iraq to resume oil exports to fund the purchase of food and medicine. But the international community deserves to know with certainty that the food and medicine purchased under this plan reach the people of Iraq rather than Saddam's armed forces. 
This program can go forward the instant Saddam Hussein accepts U.N. Resolutions 706 and 712 and puts in place a U.N.-supervised system to monitor oil exports and food distribution. History teaches that the consequences of war echo far beyond the battlefield. Our coalition in the Gulf war did more than defeat an aggressor. Our common effort created new opportunities for lasting peace throughout the Middle East. All Americans hope to see this region, so long driven by war, blessed by peace. In that spirit, the United States supports Bahrain's decision to participate along with its GCC partners in the upcoming peace conference. This readiness, this willingness to reach out strengthens the prospect for the only peace that can endure, a fair and comprehensive peace acceptable to all parties in the region.

Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony for President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia
October 22, 1991

Your country knows better than most the harsh lessons of history, what happens when aggression goes unchecked. When Iraq invaded Kuwait, the Czech and Slovak people stepped forward to take their place in the coalition against the aggressor. Even as it struggled to secure its own fragile independence, your country came to the defense of a nation in need


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez of Spain in Madrid
October 29, 1991

The President. I think the conference is properly structured. The United Nations, we've all seen, has come into a very important new phase in its existence, fulfilling the dreams of some of its founding fathers in terms of peacemaking, peacekeeping in various parts of the world. The standing up against the aggression caused by Iraq is perhaps the foremost example. But they're also playing a useful role, still, in trying to achieve peace in Cyprus. They're trying very hard, the Secretary-General is, in El Salvador. And you look around the world, and they are very active, constructively so, in many areas.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of The Netherlands and President Jacques Delors of the Commission of the European Community in The Hague
November 9, 1991

President Bush. Well, I'm not sure how effective sanctions by themselves will be. The decision to take the sanctions was to strongly back the efforts of the EC. As I mentioned, they are not complete yet. We are going to go to the United Nations to try to strengthen the concept of oil embargo. But I don't think anybody can predict with any accuracy that sanctions alone will solve the problems in Yugoslavia, in Haiti, or in Iraq, or in other places. But it is the way that the European Community felt, backed now by the United States, that we can make our position better, clearer to the people in the various entities inside Yugoslavia.


Remarks to the Pearl Harbor Survivors Association in Honolulu, Hawaii
December 7, 1991

We've reached this morning because generation after generation of Americans kept faith with our founders and our heroes. From the snows of Valley Forge, to the fiery seas of Midway and Pearl Harbor, to the sands of Iraq and Kuwait, Americans lived and died true to their ideals. They have prepared the way for a world of unprecedented freedom and cooperation. And thank God you Pearl Harbor survivors are here today to see this come to pass.


Remarks on Presenting the Medal of Freedom and the Presidential Award for Exceptional Service to United Nations Officials
December 12, 1991

And, Mr. Secretary-General, I am personally grateful to you for your strong stand against Iraq's assault on Kuwait, your tireless work to sustain the coalition. In large part because of your leadership, the United Nations now stands closer to its founding ideal than at any time in history.




