MID 292801, US v USSR, 1 may to 31-May-68 to 2-Jul-68

288 - Commencement Address at Glassboro State College.
June 4, 1968

I am glad to return to Glassboro. I shall always remember this town as a place of warm friendship and hospitable people. The world will remember Glassboro, I hope, as a place where understanding between nations was advanced by the United States and the Soviet Union

But hope and achievement are certainly there to see. Our relations with the Soviet Union offer an example. This has been a time of unusual strain and difficulty. But what period in our history has been more productive in promoting cooperation between our two countries? 
Many feared that the war in Vietnam would prevent any progress. Many predictions were made to this effect. But despite the predictions and despite the difficulties, we have agreed upon a treaty outlawing armaments in outer space. We have negotiated a treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons, and it has now been tabled. We have achieved a civil air agreement that permits Soviet Union planes to land in the United States and United States planes to land in the Soviet Union. And we are moving toward other agreements.
A second principle in the search for peace is this: The road there is far less rocky when the world's two greatest powers--the United States and the Soviet Union--are willing to travel part of the way together. 
Our progress toward a nuclear nonproliferation treaty in the past year gives evidence of this. 
The control of nuclear weapons is a matter which goes far beyond the interest of the United States and the Soviet Union. It touches the life of every nation--and every human being--on this earth. 
But beyond the treaty, there is much more to be done. The nations which we are asking to forgo nuclear weapons are now, in turn, urging the two great powers, the United States and the Soviet Union, to scale down the nuclear arms race--and these nations deserve an answer from us. The answer can only be found in disarmament. 
For our part, the United States is ready now to move immediately in the direction of disarmament--if our two nations can reach binding agreements which Preserve the security of each nation. The United States is ready now to begin such agreements.
A third principle underscored in the last year is this: Peace will be achieved not only by resolving the bitter conflicts of today. Even after we end these conflicts, there remains another task: to build a pattern of cooperation in the world. 
But during the past year, the work of peace has been going on in many ways that rarely make headlines---on some issues Which are less than life-or-death matters. But as these issues touch on our relations with another great power, the Soviet Union, which you good people here at Glassboro, at the college and in the community did so much to try to help us promote, they are important nonetheless. 
During the last year we completed work with the Soviet Union on a treaty forbidding weapons in outer space. 
During the last year we completed work with the Soviet Union on an agreement to assist astronauts downed in either country. 
We completed work during the last year on a new consular treaty. 
We completed work during the last year on an agreement permitting the Soviet Union's planes to land in the United States, and the planes of the United States of America to land in the Soviet Union. 
Only yesterday your Government began talks with the Soviet Union about a renewal of our cultural exchange agreement with the Soviet Union. 
Now we believe genuinely that every one of those steps is a step toward peace. 
The disagreements between the Soviet Union and the United States, of course, have not been removed--not by any means. 
We have yet to win an agreement which would avoid a costly anti-ballistic missile race between the United States and the Soviets. We are ready to make such an agreement; and we urge the Soviets to join us, as we urged them to set a date for such a meeting when we met here at your college campus. 
But in the last year, we have made some progress. We have proved that we can agree, can agree in part, on some occasions at least on some issues. We have proved that our two countries can behave as responsible members of the family of nations. And that is a hopeful sign, indeed. 
Scientists from this country and the Soviet Union--and from 50 other countries--have already begun an international biological program to enrich our understanding of man and his environment. 
I propose that we make this effort a permanent concern of our nations. I propose that the United States scientists join with the scientists of the Soviet Union and other nations to form an international council on the human environment. 
Second, I propose that we step up our efforts to develop a global satellite communications system. The United States believes that better communications are essential to mutual understanding between nations. That is why we proposed such a system in 1963. Now, more than 60 nations, large and small, have joined. We look forward to the day when the Soviet Union and the nations of Eastern Europe will join the system. 
Finally, I can suggest other opportunities for cooperation between the United States, the Soviet Union, and other nations--cooperation to extend our knowledge, cooperation to develop our resources which man has scarcely touched.

There is the American proposal for an international decade of undersea exploration. There is the continuing exploration of the Arctic and the Antarctic. In the Antarctic, we are already working with the Soviet Union--and the area has been freed from military tension by our treaty of 1962.
It was with this aim that I came here last year to meet with Chairman Kosygin. And it is with this aim that I come here again today. 
I believe that the old antagonisms which we call the "cold war" must fade--and I believe they will fade under stable, under enlightened leadership. 
I believe that the two great powers who met here in your hospitable surroundings last year have begun--have begun however haltingly--to bridge the gulf that has separated them for a quarter of a century. And in this day when some are not too hopeful, I am optimistic and I believe that--with the leadership that you and the leaders of your nation and the leadership of people like you in other nations through their leaders--we can bridge the gulf that has separated us for more than a quarter of a century. 


308 - Remarks Before the U.N. General Assembly Following Its Endorsement of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
June 12, 1968

I recalled the modest and mutual reductions in arms spending that had been achieved by the United States and the Soviet Union. And I said then, "Let us pray that the tide has turned--that further and far-reaching agreements lie ahead--and that future generations will mark 1964 as the year the world turned for all time away from the horrors of war and constructed new bulwarks for peace

It is right that we should be so obligated. The nonnuclear states--who undertake with this treaty to forgo nuclear weapons--are entitled to the assurance that powers possessing them, particularly the United States and the Soviet Union, will lose no time in finding the way to scale down the nuclear arms race. 
We desire--yes, we urgently desire--to begin early discussions on the limitation of strategic offensive and defensive nuclear weapons systems. 
We shall search for an agreement that will not only avoid another costly and futile escalation of the arms race, but will deescalate it



309 - Remarks at the Ratification Ceremony for the Consular Convention Between the United States and the Soviet Union.
June 13, 1968

The treaty we proclaim today is historic. It is the first bilateral treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States. When we entered into diplomatic relations 35 years ago, we agreed on the need for such a treaty. Now we have succeeded in concluding it. 
The intervening years have been filled with momentous events. Both of our nations, I think, have made very great progress. During these years, we have been joined together in war, and we have been separated in uneasy and partial peace. 
There are still many problems that we have not solved--for which our two countries bear a very heavy responsibility. Some of them remain dangerous. 
Nevertheless--if there is the will on both sides--I am convinced that we can move forward to overcome these animosities and suspicions, and the difficulties which have clouded our relations during the past quarter of a century--and which, unfortunately, still cloud them.
The consular convention between the United States and the Soviet Union provides for the performance of consular functions in both countries to facilitate commerce between these two countries. The convention provides also for the protection of the citizens of each country when they are present in the territory of the other. This treaty will promote and encourage normal contacts between the two countries and their citizens. 
As reference has already been made yesterday, I was very proud to participate in the overwhelming approval of the nonproliferation treaty by the United Nations. There our two countries have been able to work together and, with the other nations of the world, achieve a new kind of victory-for mankind, for peace, and for the control of arms. 
Let us be clear. We still have deep and dangerous differences on certain issues with the Soviet Union. But the peace of the world is too important to let these differences prevent us from exploring every avenue to a more peaceful relationship and to a more cooperative world. 
The United States and the Soviet Union have enormous power--and, therefore, they have very great responsibility.
--We must come to grips constructively with these issues which still divide us.
--We must move in parallel where our vitalinterests permit it.
--We must work together wherever and whenever we can.
We can hope that this treaty between the Soviet Union and the United States will be a sign for the future. It could help to establish a pattern of progress--in disarmament, in space, in science, in the arts, and--I hope-ultimately in a broadening area of politics. 
At the end of that road is the welfare and the prosperity of 450 million Russians and Americans--and more than 3 1/2 billion citizens of the community that we call the world


339 - The President's News Conference
June 26, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. I know of no basis for those rumors. I have no plans for it



345 - Remarks at the Dedication of the J. Percy Priest Project, Nashville, Tennessee.
June 29, 1968

But more is required. We must now turn to a task at least equally complex and difficult: to bring under control in this world the nuclear arms race--offensive and defensive weapons--in ways which do not endanger the security of the United States, our allies, or others. 
It would be easy for the United States and the Soviet Union to continue on the present course of piling weapon system on weapon system, diverting billions upon billions of dollars, while adding nothing to the security of either country. 
But the time is now at hand to find security in a more rational way



349 - Remarks at the Signing of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty
July 1, 1968

Now at this moment of achievement and great hope, I am gratified to be able to report and announce to the world a significant agreement--an agreement that we have actively sought and worked for since January 1964: 
Agreement has been reached between the Governments of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States to enter in the nearest future into discussions on the limitation and the reduction of both offensive strategic nuclear weapons delivery systems and systems of defense against ballistic missiles. 
Discussion of this most complex subject will not be easy. We have no illusions that it will be. I know the stubborn, patient persistence that it has required to come this far. We do not underestimate the difficulties that may lie ahead. I know the fears, the suspicions, and the anxieties that we shall have to overcome. But we do believe that the same spirit of accommodation that is reflected in the negotiation of the present treaty can bring us to a good and fruitful result. 
Man can still shape his destiny in the nuclear age--and learn to live as brothers





