MID 454101, Iran 

Remarks at the Iftaar Dinner
September 17, 2008
One of these innovators is Professor Maysam Ghovanloo. This immigrant from Iran has become one of our Nation's most ingenious biomedical engineers. Last month, the good professor and his team of researchers at Georgia Tech unveiled an incredible invention that could one day help people with severe disabilities operate wheelchairs and surf the Internet by simply moving their tongue. Through this pioneering research, this good professor has brought new hope to thousands. He, like others in this room, have earned the admiration of our citizens.

Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 2008
The brutal nature of the extremists increasingly clear, the coalition of nations confronting terror is growing stronger. Over the past 7 years, Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from regimes that actively sponsored terror to democracies that fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. A few nations--regimes like Syria and Iran--continue to sponsor terror. Yet their numbers are growing fewer, and they're growing more isolated from the world. 
As the 21st century unfolds, some may be tempted to assume that the threat has receded. This would be comforting; it would be wrong. The terrorists believe time is on their side, so they made waiting out civilized nations part of their strategy. We must notallow them to succeed. The nations of this body must stand united in the fight against terror. We must continue working to deny the terrorists refuge anywhere in the world, including ungoverned spaces. We must remain vigilant against proliferation by fully implementing the terms of Security Council Resolution 1540, and enforcing sanctions against North Korea and Iran. We must not relent until our people are safe from this threat to civilization. 

Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy
October 13, 2008
We discussed Iran, and we agreed that Iran must notbeallowed to have a nuclear weapon. We discussed the importance of full implementation of United Nations sanctions on the regime in Tehran.


