MID 60703, US v USSR, 24 feb to 26-Mar-57 to 19-Nov-57



37 - World Broadcast in Observance of Fifteenth Anniversary of Voice of America.
February 25, 1957

One small country after another has been swallowed up by international Communism. Their freedom is lost. Their national pride is crushed. Their religion is trampled on. Their economies are mere feeders for that of Russia. And if they attempt to assert their tradition of freedom, their people are shot down by the thousands. Witness: Hungary



50 - The President's News Conference
March 13, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. No. I remember reports, it seems to me, right after the fighting ceased, of some kind; but I haven't had any recent reports on it, at least that I recall now

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think that is his speculation, that's all.




56 - The President's News Conference
March 27, 1957

I would merely say this: that each of these countries, our allies, has a right to the kind of things that it can get for use within its own territory to defend itself; and when we are in a position to help, and there seems to be a scheme that would work to the economy of both our countries, why, then, we favor it and explore it as far as we can. But I wouldn't want to discuss the relative strength of the two nations with respect to any particular spot

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, we recognize that any nation in the world has a right to take such measures as it deems necessary for its own security and defense. 
I think the statements of the Russians are completely indefensible, and while I know of no specific purpose or plan that leads to this particular charge they are making and their particular threats, as you call them, that they are making, theright of Norway to take any measure it pleases within its own country for its own security certainly is clear. And I might point out that when I went to Europe in 1951--in December, 1950--that the same charges and same threats were made at that moment




70 - The President's News Conference
April 10, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, there has been a great deal of talk about bringing more closely together the forbidden lists for Soviets and for China, many people maintaining that it's ridiculous to allow the Soviets and, you might say, European communistic countries, to buy certain things and to bar those from China. So there has been a constant flow of staff work on that problem. We, as you know, just have an embargo; we don't deal with Communist China



72 - The President's News Conference
April 17, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I wouldn't comment on the general policy. I will merely say this: we have no such plans. The particular plans that we made with Great Britain were announced as a result of the Bermuda conference, and that is the only plan of any kind that has been touched upon

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, I am not there; but I do have reports from Governor Stassen. 
Governor Stassen says in his opinion we are now engaged in the most serious talks on disarmament, some partial disarmament, that we have been since World War II. He believes that the atmosphere is better and there is more indication that we are really, all of us, trying to get at some kind of a reasonable answer than we have been in the past



79 - Remarks to the National Council of the League of Women Voters.
May 1, 1957

It is astonishing how frequently we are compared, in the minds of a citizen of one of these countries we call underdeveloped, to Russia in terms of: well, which is the stronger and which is correct, which is trying to take us over, who is trying to be truculent, who is trying to start the war



80 - The President's News Conference
May 8, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would say this: no, I wouldn't attempt to interpret and to give motives and meaning. I will say, though, that we try to develop policies that, from our viewpoint, will preserve the security of the free world and deter any war, any outbreak of hostilities, so that the threats themselves do not come into consideration as we develop those theories and these plans. These threats have been a part of Soviet activity, procedure and practice, for a long, long time, and so I think you couldn't possibly make your own plans just on that basis

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course this, I think, is evidence that in this particular session of the Disarmament Committee, there is more honest and hard work being done than has been our experience in the past; but so far as the specific proposal itself is concerned, it will, of course, need very earnest study because it isn't merely acreage that is important when you are examining; it is what is within the particular areas delineated. So I think that I wouldn't want to talk about the proposal in its specific details until the studies have been completed which are now going on

THE PRESIDENT. Well, at the time--and I am trusting here strictly to memory--this was brought up as sort of a test tube operation. There was going to be a certain area selected to see, through inspection, that everybody was carrying out his pledges and whether it could be extended to a greater area. 
Now, each one of these, of course, when proposed has to be examined, as I mentioned a moment ago, with respect to the areas, the vital character or the critical character of the areas affected, and consequently even a small one is very difficult to get initiated. 
But I personally believe that these things that we believe are absolutely necessary, that is, mutual inspection, are going to come about through some such evolutionary development that is envisioned in that kind of a proposal; and I believe that any time that we can get one that seems fair to both sides, we would entertain the idea very sympathetically and study it very earnestly
THE PRESIDENT. They haven't suggested it to us, but of course you would have to know what it is they propose to talk about, all of the other things, because, after all, let's not forget that Summit meetings do not comprise merely a nice little social gathering that you can disperse and nothing happens because it was just a nice, friendly meeting. 
The world expects something, and you people by the hundreds go along and you demand news, and if you don't have any news, why, it looks not only futile but almost unwise to have such a meeting; so that I would say all of these meetings have to be carefully studied in advance before you have them



86 - Radio and Television Report to the American People on the Cost of Their Government.
May 14, 1957

In this 35% part of the budget, there are, first, the compulsory expenditures. We must pay the more than 7 billion dollars' interest on the national debt. Ours is not like the Soviet Government which recently told its people that it would no longer pay the interest on its government savings bonds

Without counting the Chinese Communists, the Soviets have the world's largest army. They have many times the number of submarines that Germany had when World War II began. They have atomic weapons and rockets and missiles. They have a large and growing air strength. They are competent in military technology and research. And all this is directed by a despotism which is fully capable of the supreme folly--that of unleashing these powerful forces if it should ever believe that it could--without destroying itself--succeed in destroying the free world




87 - The President's News Conference
May 15, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, it is not a governmental position, for the simple reason that this whole matter is under the most earnest study. The mere fact that the Soviets have indicated they might be interested instantly throws it into the study place, and just exactly where you might end up, and what might be the extent of the territory, I couldn't possibly predict

THE PRESIDENT. Well, when you say "real hope," Mr. Morgan, you are asking a man to use an adjective that I think is probably not quite justified. Certainly, we must not lose hope. That would be fatal. That would be consigning the world, as I see it, to a fate that is very desperate no matter which way it goes. 
I think that the reason that the Soviets are taking a different tone is because they, as well as all the rest of the world, are feeling the pinch of building, supporting, maintaining these tremendous military organizations. They are bound to feel the pinch. They have an economy, say, a third of the productivity of our own. We feel the pinch. Now, they don't feel it in the same way because their taxes are handled very abruptly and even rudely. Their taxes are lowered by telling the people, "We won't pay the interest on the national debt," or any other thing they want to do. We can't operate that way. We are a free society, and we use the personal incentive as the way to generate the power that the United States must generate. But they are nevertheless feeling the pinch. And because they feel that pinch, and because they see, just as well as anybody else, where the world is really pushing, I believe that they are now growing more serious. 
Now, this doesn't mean that they are not at the same time going to be very difficult, because they are going to want just as big an advantage out of the thing as they can get. They will want the scales tipped in their favor. We will try to insist it be a definite quid pro quo equality, and there will be so many arguments about that. 
But I do believe that the seriousness comes about because of an awakening sense of responsibility everywhere; no matter how dictatorial or how arbitrary a government, you cannot escape the logic of world events as they are developing around us today




92 - The President's News Conference
May 22, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, strange I hadn't heard of that particular thing, although it has been implicit in some of the suggestions that I have seen. I don't think we could possibly do it on a mile-for-mile basis unless each wanted to select an area where it was completely insignificant. I think that we have got to reach honest understandings on these things in which each can have confidence which is fair, and the world can see is fair. 
I just do want to take this occasion to say one more word about disarmament. It seems to me that the more any intelligent man thinks about the possibilities of war today, the more he should understand you have got to work on this business of disarmament. I think our first concern should be making certain we are not ourselves being recalcitrant, we are not being picayunish about the thing. We ought to have an open mind and make it possible for others, if they are reasonable, logical men, to meet us half way so we can make these agreements. 
Now, on the other hand, any nation that is facing a government which has a history of breaking of treaties, and so on, that we have encountered in our dealings with the Soviets over these past years, we have to be especially careful of the inspectional systems, systems in which we can have confidence. We must, at the same time, though, keep our minds open and keep exploring every field, every facet of this whole great field, to see if something can't be done. It just has to be done in the interest of the United States.
THE PRESIDENT. Of course I think everything which you discuss comes under the general heading of "disarmament." Even if you agreed to limit armaments, it is disarmament to the extent that you are not pushing any further, I mean if you would say we will stop where we are now. Partial disarmament is still disarmament. 
This is what I believe: you mentioned just casually the words "world tensions" or the phrase "world tensions." That has got to be diminished or there is going to be no progress in the other. At the same time there has got to be progress in some kind of disarmament or there is going to be no reduction in world tensions. 
Here is something that you have got to look at as a package, and I think it would be futile to hope for a complete or a final drastic agreement, answer in the first instance. I believe it has got to be gradual because each side will want to test the confidence of the other, and so if we can make the first simple moves which will give us each a chance to test the good faith, the efficiency of inspectional systems, all the rest of it, then I think you can confidently hope to take the next step, and the next step, until we can get to a place where these defense budgets, whether they are reported honestly in dollars, as is ours, or concealed in a great and enormous work program, as in the case of Russia, are brought down within reason so that so many man-hours don't have to go into the production of weapons.



105 - The President's News Conference
June 5, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, this is what I say, of course, about such an appearance. Now, let's make no mistake, that appearance was not the same as taking a kinescope of one of these press conferences and broadcasting it completely in Russia. We know that there are no prepared questions here and no prepared answers. It is a matter of trying to deal honestly with each other, and then putting it in the papers and on the radio and on the television screen; and this other performance of last Sunday afternoon was far from that. 
Now, with respect to his proposal, he took one part of a proposal that affects not especially our country, but countries of our allies; and it is an old method when you are dealing with a number of allies to try to propose something which seems to be to the obvious interests of one in order to drive a wedge between them. What is done in Europe, what we do there, is always going to be the subject of consultation between us and our allies before we do anything about it. So this matter--I noticed he didn't say that Germany would be reunified or anything of that kind, just merely withdraw the troops
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think that we can only say we can only hope so. 
As I told you before, all the reports are that this time at London the conference reflects, apparently on all sides, a more serious, a more definite, purpose to get ahead with substantive matters than ever before, and to use it, the occasion, less as a mere platform for propaganda. So, every word that indicates a desire to meet sensibly on a step-by-step basis--which is the only way, by the way, I think it can ever be done--I welcome it and certainly don't reject it until it's been explored to the full
Now, if the President of the United States should go to Russia and ask for full time, now let's see what he would get: first of all, there are twelve television stations--[confers with Mr. Hagerty]-Pardon me. Don't let me cheat--fourteen--and there is radio coverage. 
I would say this: if the Soviet Union in return for that courtesy of themselves wanted to ask an American, no matter who it might be, because, after all, you know Khrushchev is not the head of the Russian State--except in power--[laughter]--but if they should invite an American to come, and guarantee that there would be no jamming, that there would be no interference, that they wouldn't put up counter attractions to take people away from their radios and all that sort of thing for that time, if you can believe that that will happen, I can tell you this, that somebody in this Government would be glad to accept
Those that argue for the elimination quote several things. First, that it is foolish to say China can't have something, and then you ship it to Russia and it can go on through. The opposing argument is that they have to do that and use up their transportation space; that costs them some money

THE PRESIDENT. Only you could do that, I think, in toto the way I expressed it there, in a complete thing. You could do that only if the same agreement were so couched, so made, that you could see there would be no more atomic bombs used in war. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, only if it brought in that other part, though, that we were going to eliminate these things as weapons of war, and there were an inspection system that could make sure that that was coming about; otherwise, you couldn't do it. 
I am saying that we couldn't enter into any program which forever banned tests unless we also had a system which we knew would and could be convinced would forever ban the use of these weapons in war. 
THE PRESIDENT. Nothing except what the rest of you have seen on the--in the--have we got--[confers with Mr. Hagerty.] Mr. Hagerty says we have it. I haven't seen it. All I have seen is what you saw on the television



115 - The President's News Conference
June 19, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, they have made a three-point proposal: one for limiting, or suspending testing for two to three years; one for establishing a commission, international commission; and one for establishing so-called land posts within certain areas. 
These are hopeful signs, as I see them, and they deserve the most earnest and sympathetic study. They are, in effect, somewhat along the line that has been proposed to the--time and again, suggested, but until we find out all the details of them, you can't comment on them too specifically, because to state a generalization is one thing, to see how it works out is another
THE PRESIDENT. Oh, no. No, no. 
I would be perfectly delighted to make some satisfactory arrangement for temporary suspension of tests while we could determine whether we couldn't make some agreements that would allow it to be a permanent arrangement
THE PRESIDENT. No, I didn't say suspension without any conditions at all. If I gave that impression, I made a very great error. It would have to be suspension under such a method that we both knew exactly what we were doing, and then, as I say, using that interval to work out something in which we could have real confidence

THE PRESIDENT. Well, you say "disarmament package." It would have to be, I would call it certain opening phases to a disarmament program that would have to proceed for many years and in many small steps. 
Now, such a feature would naturally not be isolated because, after all, everybody wants to know whether the other fellow is keeping faith, so there would have to be some kind of inspectional basis with it. As a matter of fact, the latest Soviet proposal suggests certain inspectional teams or inspectional commissions and teams in the respective areas, so that you couldn't possibly consider this in isolation from all other parts, but it would not necessarily be a complete overall--the very fact that there was mere suspension and not permanent elimination shows that it would be only a first step


But as long as it is in the field of discussion, and there seems to be a general agreement all around that this time a disarmament conference is not being used as merely a sounding board for propaganda, I don't want to disturb what seems to be a very improved atmosphere, and so I would prefer not to talk about it at this moment



118 - Address to the 1957 Governors' Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia.
June 24, 1957

In the Soviet Union, political power is exercised through unbridled force. All peoples of all areas where the Kremlin holds sway must instantly obey a Moscow decree, no matter how it violates their traditions, no matter how inapplicable it may be to local concerns. 
Yet the Kremlin itself, coming to recognize some of the deficiencies of extreme centralization, has just embarked upon a drastic reorganization of its massive bureaucracy. Soviet rulers have felt compelled to allow some small part of government to gravitate closer to the people. 
On the Soviet periphery as well, centralization has revealed its inherent weaknesses. There even the Soviets are learning the age-old truth that those who have known freedom will never willingly live merely as a creature of the sun. 
The assertion and maintenance of its independence by Yugoslavia, the unceasing unrest in East Germany, the upsurge of freedom in ruthlessly repressed Hungary, the increasing liberation of controls in Poland, all bear witness to man's eternal refusal to be dominated by his fellow creatures or to exist as a pawn of government. 
I am profoundly convinced that one day--inevitably--those nations and those peoples will again be free. Evolutionary change, generated by pressures from within and from without, hopes and yearnings of the oppressed, kept alive by the friendships of the free peoples of the earth, will eventually destroy despotic power. I have complete faith that those downtrodden populations will again walk upright upon the earth. But in the meantime, the cost will be great and sad--measured in privation, in degradation, in human suffering and despair



119 - The President's News Conference
June 26, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. You know, I don't know of any better question, because I asked it myself. I would say this: I would hope that they would learn how to use clean bombs, and if they ever used any atomic bombs would use clean ones--for the simple reason that then at least the bombs used would be specific weapons instead of weapons of general and uncontrolled destruction

THE PRESIDENT. Well, there have been some indications. They have talked, and as you well know, about the acceptability of certain kinds of inspection; and the only thing we can do is patiently, with our allies, to explore and to see whether this inspectional system in any direction is sufficiently sound and good that we can, in that area at least, make some agreement



124 - The President's News Conference
July 3, 1957

You take that policy and you try to find out how it would affect other nations. You don't want to go to the Soviets or to any other nation, for example, and make a proposal that affects a third country without that third country's approval, because then you suddenly become like Napoleon and Alexander, on a raft in the Vistula, settling the fate of Europe

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I would say it was unhelpful; that is all I would say about it



134 - The President's News Conference
July 17, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. I would be against any recess that was merely occasioned by someone getting tired. Now, once in a while, as new ideas come forward it is necessary to have a recess so that each of these delegations can go and, with their own governments, study them in detail, their implications, their meanings, and so on. But a recess merely because people are tired and a bit discouraged is the very kind of thing that I oppose with all my might. We simply must not get discouraged in the work and in the process

THE PRESIDENT. It might. You know, I should like to make this clear again. There is nothing that I wouldn't try experimentally in order to bring about better relationships as long as we observe this one very necessary caution, which is, you must not have meetings that, by their very holding, or by their very occurrence, give rise to great hopes which, if unrealized, create a great wave of pessimism. 
I know of nothing that has occurred in our time where greater optimism, or enthusiasm almost, must be maintained in the work itself to carry it forward, than in this whole business of beginning disarmament, of relieving tensions in the world. 
The alternative is so terrible that you can merely say this: all the risks you take in advancing or in trying to advance are as nothing compared to doing nothing, to sitting on your hands
Now, I do say, at the same time, answering the other part of your question, that the shipping of Soviet arms and support into these areas cannot possibly contribute to peace and the lessening of tensions. It must have the opposite effect

THE PRESIDENT. No. The question was whether meetings between the two Defense Ministers might bring about something. I said, and, of course, it well might, because what you are constantly testing are statements, and then the extent to which those statements are trustworthy, carried out and supported by deeds and actions that are provable. 
Now, as I say, at one time, I repeat, Marshal Zhukov and I operated together very closely. I couldn't see any harm coming from a meeting between the two Defense Ministers, if that could be arranged



150 - The President's News Conference
August 7, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it is difficult indeed to give you any estimate or evaluation of progress for the simple reason that it would be pure conjecture. 
We are not dealing with people concerning whom we have the same opportunities of getting the state of their public opinion as they have of us. They read our newspapers, our magazines, every other kind of document and statement coming out of the United States, and they can get some inkling of how we feel, what we want to do. We haven't that opportunity, and we listen merely to prepared speeches which have some purpose other than mere enlightenment. 
Now, the great proposal that is before the conference now, before the whole group, which I am viewing with the utmost hope, let's put it that way, is this great problem of, great opportunity for inspection, both aerial and supplemented by ground. 
At Geneva, you will recall, I offered to exchange the aerial inspection of the United States for that of Russia. This proposal has been enlarged, because our own allies, seeing that the one great truth inspires this kind of thing, is valid-- 
That truth is this: if you can relieve the world of the great fear of surprise, devastating attack, then disarmament, in my opinion, will follow step by step almost automatically. Now, what we are trying to do, then, is to relieve this great fear of surprise attack. 
So now, our allies and ourselves propose the inspection of all North America, north of the Rio Grande, and all of Europe in exchange for the same inspectional privileges of Russia and her satellites. 
Now, if this could be entertained even for a moment, and we could make any progress, I would consider it the greatest ray of hope that has arrived on this dark scene since I have been in the White House. 
But, failing that, we have proposed also a more limited area which would not expose any of the central secrets probably of either side, but which would give us an opportunity to test the methods, procedures, and to see whether they will work, to see whether we can develop enough confidence as between the opposing parties to go a little further. 
Now, remember this: we can talk all we want about specific measures of disarmament. Nothing is going to work unless it is preceded by some, or accompanied by some little growth in mutual confidence. These things that I am talking about are to achieve not only material results but some growth in mutual confidence, and that is the thing that must lie behind it all
THE PRESIDENT. Well, except for one personal exchange as a polite amenity following the Geneva Conference, I have had no direct communication with Marshal Zhukov--I think it was April 1946. All of the opinions and statements I have ever made to you people about the Marshal were based upon, I have carefully explained, my six months' connection with him in 1945. So, since then, I have had no direct communication with him. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I certainly would not want to guess at them now. I would have to go back, because they had nothing to do with--this is 1946, eleven years ago, and I wouldn't want-they had nothing to do with disarmament, except that he did have this feeling that America and Russia were the two peoples who should try to devise plans and more or less induce others to conform. 
But that was, I say, a long time ago, and I know nothing about his convictions at the moment



157 - The President's News Conference
August 21, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Well, of course, there are very definite limitations on what you can do in the internal affairs of any other country. 
Now, first of all, the situation there is that we were accused of a lot of things which are obviously a smoke screen behind which people that have the leftish leanings are trying to build up their power. 
The pattern that is seemingly emerging is an old one for the Soviets, to insert or offer economic and military aid, and through doing so, to penetrate the receiving country with their agents, for these to get into power, to find stooges that will do their will, and finally, to take over this country. 
Now, in Syria, how far this pattern has gone, we don't know. Actually, there is a very strict censorship and our Embassy is not free to give us all the information that it can get. We don't know exactly what is happening. So, frankly, what we are doing is getting every piece of information we can daily. We consult with others that are interested and have knowledge and trying to keep abreast of the situation. 
It is not one of those instances, at present, that justify any kind of action at all under the Mid-East doctrine
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think this: I think that is the ultimate aim, but, of course, an ultimate aim of that kind is kept very definitely under cover, because one of the things, when you go in, you appeal to the spirit of nationalism--I am talking now about the Soviet. They appeal to the spirit of nationalism in the country, telling them that through this method, you are independent, you run your own affairs, but when they get a hold of the thing, they find out too late that they are being run from somewhere else.




169 - The President's News Conference
September 3, 1957

THE PRESIDENT. Any answer to your question, Mr. Arrowsmith, must observe the limits that are established by considerations of national security. And if you will read the Russian statement carefully, you will see that it is more notable for what it didn't say than for what it did say. Whenever it talked about the future, the translation is most evasive. 
I can say a few things about this. First of all, let's remember this: the Russians never made any statement yet except for their own purposes, their own special purposes, and I don't know of any reason for giving it greater credence than many of the statements of the past, where they have been shown to be less than completely reliable. 
Now, in this whole field, let us remember there are a number of things. There is a long distance between proving that you can fire one test instrument in a particular direction and achieve one result, and acquiring that instrument in sufficient numbers and sufficient reliability to be worthwhile tactically. 
For a long time, the long-range missile is not going to provide the best means of delivering an explosive charge, and that is all it is for. 
For a long time, there will be a changeover as they become perfected. 
But the big thing to remember is that a mere tested vehicle is a long ways from actual production
THE PRESIDENT. I don't see any particularly constructive step that we can take at this moment. There must be something happen on the other side that does not seem to be particularly likely. I believe there is a meeting this afternoon. And it is entirely possible that there will be some chink occur and be visible that is not visible at the moment




207 - The President's News Conference
October 3, 1957

Now, this is not, I admit, a very persuasive thing. As I have told this group before, I have had myself challenged on even more academic questions than this in Russia; and I wasn't too successful in convincing the other fellow, although I thought I was very eloquent. [Laughter



210 - The President's News Conference
October 9, 1957

Now, every scientist that I have talked to since this occurred-I recalled some of them and asked them--every one of them has spoken in most congratulatory terms about the capabilities of the Russian scientists in putting this in the air. 
They expressed themselves as pleased rather than chagrined because at least the Soviets have proved the first part of it, that this thing will successfully orbit. But there are a lot of other things in the scientific inquiry that are not yet answered, and which we are pushing ahead to answer. 
As to their firing of an intercontinental missile, we have not been told anything about the details of that firing. They have proved again and, indeed, this launching of the satellite proves, that they can hurl an object a considerable distance. They also said, as I recall that announcement, that it landed in the target area, which could be anywhere, because you can make target areas the size you please; and they also said it was a successful re-entry into the atmosphere, and landing at or near the target. 
Now, that is a great accomplishment, if done. I have talked to you in the past about our own development in this regard as far as security considerations permit, and I can say this: the ICBM, the IRBM, we call them, are still going ahead--those projects-- on the top priority within the Government, incidentally a priority which was never accorded to the satellite program. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I believe it would be dangerous to predict what science is going to do in the next twenty years, but it is going to be a very considerable time in this realm just as in any other before the old is completely replaced by the new, and even then it will be a question of comparative costs and accuracy of methods of delivery. 
It is going to be a long term. It is not a revolutionary process that will take place in the reequipping of defense forces, it will be an evolutionary. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, no, I don't, because even yet, let's remember this: the value of that satellite going around the earth is still problematical, and you must remember the evolution that our people went through and the evolution that the others went through. 
From 1945, when the Russians captured all of the German scientists in Peenemunde, which was their great laboratory and experimental grounds for the production of the ballistic missiles they used in World War II, they have centered their attention on the ballistic missile. 
Originally, our people seemed to be more interested in the aerodynamic missile. We have a history of going back for quite a ways in modest research in the intercontinental ballistic missile, but until there were very great developments in the atomic bomb, it did not look profitable and economical to pursue that course very much, and our people did not go into it very earnestly until somewhere along about 1953, I think. 
Now, so far as this satellite itself is concerned, if we were doing it for science, and not for security, which we were doing, I don't know of any reasons why the scientists should have come in and urged that we do this before anybody else could do it. 
Now, quite naturally, you will say, "Well, the Soviets gained a great psychological advantage throughout the world," and I think in the political sense that is possibly true; but in the scientific sense it is not true except for the proof of the one thing, that they have got the propellants and the projectors that will put these things in the air. 
THE PRESIDENT. Not at this time, no. There is no--suddenly all America seems to become scientists, and I am hearing many, many ideas. [Laughter] And I think that, given time, satellites will be able to transmit to the earth some kind of information with respect to what they see on the earth or what they find on the earth. 
But I think that that period is a long ways off when you stop to consider that even now the Russians, under a dictatorial society where they had some of the finest scientists in the world who have for many years been working on this, apparently from what they say they have put one small ball in the air. 
I wouldn't believe that at this moment you have to fear the intelligence aspects of this. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I will say this: about the rebuff I know nothing. If there was any committed, I am sure it was unintentional. 
Now, what happened: You will recall somebody in one of these meetings asked me whether I thought that a meeting between Mr. Wilson and Marshal Zhukov might produce anything useful, and I said it might, and that later I was talking to the Secretary about it, and he said it was a hypothetical question and got a hypothetical answer. I don't know whether it would do any good or not; and he said, "Well, there is this one thing about it, we have got to beware"--and, of course, this we all know--"of bilateral talks when you have allies and comrades in very great ventures like we have in NATO, and so on." At that moment talks were going on in Britain on disarmament on a multilateral basis, and it would have probably had a very bad interpretation in the world if any such thing at that time had taken place. 
The only follow-up that I know of, was somebody asked the State Department--it may have been an ambassador, I don't know, somebody asked the State Department--well, was this a serious thing? Was this an invitation? And he said exactly what I have just told you, it was merely a hypothetical answer to a hypothetical question. 
So far as I know, there has never been any additional activity in connection with it. 
THE PRESIDENT. I said--now, wait a minute--I said, "if done," when I said "if it's shot accurately to deliver its load at a predetermined spot, that was a very great achievement." 
THE PRESIDENT. I am not going to give you an estimate of the Russian claim. I will just say this: we weren't invited to witness it; I think that they have fired objects a very considerable distance, but I don't know anything about their accuracy, and until you know something of their accuracy, you know nothing at all about their usefulness in warfare. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, he was probably talking in these terms. I did not see his statement, so I am not commenting on his statement, I am just saying this: he may have been talking in terms of the perfection you need from a military weapon before it is really a weapon. 
THE PRESIDENT. Not imminent. For a number of months different scientists have told me, or different people--I don't know whether it was ever told to me officially--that they were working on it, they were doing something about it; but again, no one ever suggested to me as anything of a race except, of course, more than once we would say, well, there is going to be a great psychological advantage in world politics to putting the thing up. But that didn't seem to be a reason, in view of the real scientific character of our development, there didn't seem to be a reason for just trying to grow hysterical about it. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I should like to say this: As you know, we have many allies in the world, and anything that looks like a bilateral attempt to dictate to the world on the part of ourselves and any other country, we try carefully to avoid. So anything that we would do we would be certain to clear with our allies; and if everybody agreed, why, that would be one answer. If everybody was fearful, we would have to take that into consideration. 
THE PRESIDENT. I will tell you this: I think this is not secret at all, Dr. Bronk visited me again yesterday, and he had had a talk with one of the very high officials in the governmental scientific work of Russia and he said merely that he didn't know that that figure was correct. So far as I know we are not thinking of putting one of that weight in the air. 
Now, so far as the satellite itself is concerned, that does not raise my apprehensions, not one iota. I see nothing at this moment, at this stage of development, that is significant in that development as far as security is concerned, except, as I pointed out, it does definitely prove the possession by the Russian scientists of a very powerful thrust in their rocketry, and that is important. I can only say that I have had every group that I know anything about, to ask them is there anything more we can do in the development of our rocket program any better than it is being done? And, except for certain minor items or, you might say, almost involving administration, there has been little said. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, certainly again I am quoting the scientists, there is no indication that this will be scientifically more valuable. If it is 180 pounds, I think it has astonished our scientists; I would say that. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Dulles issued a statement on that last evening which seems to have been misinterpreted. He said that, with reference to this reported suggestion by Mr. Khrushchev, that there should be a U. S.-Soviet study of the control of objects entering outer space. 
The Department of State first recalls that the London proposals of last August made by Canada, France, United Kingdom, and the United States called for just such a study. It is hoped that this offer will be accepted by the Soviet Union. 
The State Department emphasizes that these London proposals callfor a multilateral international study and not a bilateral study between the United States and U. S. S. R., and the United States would not be disposed to consider any alteration of this aspect of the proposals, although if its associates agree to such a study it might be initiated without waiting the conclusion of other substantive features of the proposal. 
I just suggest you don't forget it said that if our associates agree, then we think that such a study, not a plan, but such a study could be initiated. 


228 - The President's News Conference
October 30, 1957

THE. PRESIDENT. Well, of course, as I have I think warned each of you every time I have spoken about this subject, any effort to penetrate the Soviet mind, or at least the mind of the men in the Kremlin, to determine their reasons for doing anything is highly speculative, and that is all it is. I don't think that any Intelligence system can really give you a complete and positive answer on this. 
Now, I think our general feeling is something of this kind. There is some reason for the extraordinary frequency of changes in the Soviet ruling group since the death of Stalin. There, as you remember, Malenkov started out, and then we had him replaced. We have had the de-Stalinization of the whole Communist concept. We have had Molotov going to limbo, and others with him. Malenkov has practically been forgotten. Marshal Zhukov seemed to come up from nowhere, almost, and now we don't know whether he is actually degraded, or whether there is some other move that is contemplated. 
I did notice that one of the Soviet leaders said at a recent party: "Well, Mr. Wilson resigned as Secretary of Defense, why can't Marshal Zhukov?" My only comment on that is, I hope Marshal Zhukov's resignation was as completely voluntary and personal as was Charley Wilson's. [Laughter



230 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on Science in National Security.
November 7, 1957

In numbers, our stock of nuclear weapons is so large and so rapidly growing that we are able safely to disperse it to positions assuring its instant availability against attack, and still keep strong reserves. Our scientists assure me that we are Well ahead of the Soviets in the nuclear field, both in quantity and in quality. We intend to stay ahead

The Soviet launching of earth satellites is an achievement of the first importance, and the scientists who brought it about deserve full credit and recognition. Already, useful new facts on outer space have been produced, and more are on the way, as new satellites with added instruments are launched. 
Earth satellites, in themselves, have no direct present effect upon the nation's security. However, there is real military significance to these launchings, which I have previously mentioned publicly. Their current military significance lies in the advanced techniques and the competence in military technology they imply, evidenced, for example, by the powerful propulsion equipment necessarily used. 
But in the main, the Soviets continue to concentrate on the development of war-making weapons and supporting industries. This, as well as their political attitude in all international affairs, serves to warn us that Soviet expansionist aims have not changed. The world has not forgotten the Soviet military invasions of such countries as Finland and Poland, their support of the war in Korea, or their use of force in their ruthless suppression of Hungarian freedom. 
Eternal vigilance and increased free world military power, backed by our combined economic and spiritual strength, provide the only answer to this threat until the Soviet leaders themselves cease to consume their resources in warlike and expansionist purposes and turn them to the well-being of their own peoples. 
We frankly recognize that the Soviets are building up types of power that could, if we were attacked, damage us seriously. This is because no defensive system today can possibly be air-tight in preventing all break-throughs of planes and weapons

It is my conviction, supported by trusted scientific and military advisers, that, although the Soviets are quite likely ahead in some missile and special areas, and are obviously ahead of us in satellite development, as of today the over-all military strength of the free world is distinctly greater than that of the communist countries. 
We must see to it that whatever advantages they have, are temporary only
In the free world, we all have a lot to give and a lot to gain in security through the pooling of scientific effort. Why should we deny to our friends information that we are sure the Soviets already have?--information our friends could use toward our mutual security

What the world needs today even more than a giant leap into outer space, is a giant step toward peace. Time and again we have demonstrated our eagerness to take such a step. As a start in this direction, I urge the Soviets now to align themselves with the practical and workable disarmament proposals, approved yesterday by a large majority in the United Nations



234 - Radio and Television Address to the American People on "Our Future Security."
November 13, 1957

As you do this, my friends, remember that when a Russian graduates from high school he has had five years of physics, four years of chemistry, one year of astronomy, five years of biology, ten years of mathematics through trigonometry, and five years of a foreign language

Now this week the Soviets are celebrating the 40th anniversary of their revolution. These four decades have seen them change from an agricultural to an industrial nation. We know of their rigorous educational system and their technological achievements. 
But we see all this happening under a political philosophy that postpones again and again the promise to each man that he will be allowed to be himself, and to enjoy, according to his own desires, the fruits of his own labor. 
We have long had evidence, recently very dramatic evidence, that even under such a system it is possible to produce some remarkable material achievements. When such competence in things material is at the service of leaders who have so little regard for things human, and who command the power of an empire, there is danger ahead for free men everywhere. That, my friends, is the reason why the American people have been so aroused about the earth satellites. 
Of course, free men are meeting and will meet this challenge. 
Up to a point, this must be done on the Communists' own terms--outmatching them in military power, general technological advance, and specialized education and research. 
But this is not all the story. The real strength with which the self-governing democracies have met the tests of history is something denied to dictatorships. 
It is found in the quality of our life, and the vigor of our ideals. It manifests itself in the ever-astonishing capacity of free men for voluntary heroism, sacrifice and accomplishment when the chips are down. 
This is the weapon which has meant eventual downfall for every dictator who has made the familiar mistake of thinking all democracies "soft." 
Now, once again, we hear an expansionist regime declaring, "We will bury you." 
In a bit of American vernacular, "Oh Yeah?" It would be a grave error not to take this kind of threat literally. This theme has been a Communist doctrine for a hundred years. 
But you may recall that there was once a dictator named Hitler who also said he would bury us. He wrote a long, dull book telling precisely how he was going to do it. Not enough people took him at his word. 
We shall not make that mistake again. 
International communism has demonstrated repeatedly that its leaders are quite willing to launch aggression by violence upon other countries. They are even more ready to expand by propaganda and subversion, economic penetration and exploitation. Mostly they use a combination of all three methods. 
The free world must therefore be alert to all
. As a primary deterrent to war, maintain a strong nuclear retaliatory power. The Soviets must be convinced that any attack on us and our Allies would result, regardless of damage to us, in their own national destruction

There has been much discussion lately about whether Soviet technological break-throughs in particular areas may have suddenly exposed us to immediately increased danger, in spite of the strength of our defenses. 
As I pointed out last week, this is not the case. But these scientific accomplishments of theirs have provided us all with renewed evidence of Soviet competence in science and techniques important to modern warfare. We must, and do, regard this as a time for another critical re-examination of our entire defense position. 
The sputniks have inspired a wide variety of suggestions. These range from acceleration of missile programs, to shooting a rocket around the moon, to an indiscriminate increase in every kind of military and scientific expenditure
Today, as I have said, a principal deterrent to war is the retaliatory nuclear power of our Strategic Air Command and our Navy. We are adding missile power to these arms and to the Army as rapidly as possible. But it will be some time before either we or the Soviet forces will have long-range missile capability equal to even a small fraction of the total destructive power of our present bomber force

The same applies to economic aid. This kind of assistance helps others keep free of dependence upon the Soviet help, which too often is the prelude to Soviet domination. It shows the free world's ability to develop its resources and to increase its living standards. It helps allied economies support needed military units and remain sturdy partners of ours in this world-wide struggle

The same applies to economic aid. This kind of assistance helps others keep free of dependence upon the Soviet help, which too often is the prelude to Soviet domination. It shows the free world's ability to develop its resources and to increase its living standards. It helps allied economies support needed military units and remain sturdy partners of ours in this world-wide struggle

The Soviet Union now has--in the combined category of scientists and engineers--a greater number than the United States. And it is producing graduates in these fields at a much faster rate. 
Recent studies of the educational standards of the Soviet Union show that this gain in quantity can no longer be considered offset by lack of quality. 
This trend is disturbing. Indeed, according to my scientific advisers, this is for the American people the most critical problem of all
The warning lies in the fast rate of increase of the Soviet effort, and their obvious determination to concentrate heavily on basic research

And now one final word: The goal we seek is peace with justice. This can come to our nation only as it comes to all nations. The world's hope is that the Soviets will cooperate with all the rest of us in achieving this goal. Our defense effort, large as it is, goes only far enough to deter and defeat attack. 
We will never be an aggressor. We want adequate security. We want no more than adequacy. But we will accept nothing less



























































