MID 291001, US v USSR, 13 apr to 13-May-65 to 12-Jun-65



208 - The President's News Conference
April 27, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I have not studied the proposal and was not familiar with the fact that it had been made


235 - Remarks Broadcast on the 30th Anniversary of V-E Day.
May 7, 1965

When the dawn arrived, 20 years ago today, it was a gray dawn. Tens of millions were dead and nations were shattered. Almost before the ashes had cooled, the shadow of Soviet ambition fell across the face of Europe

Sixth, we must work toward agreement with the Soviet Union. Our firmness in danger has shown that the door to conquest in the West is forever closed. Thus, the door to peaceful settlement is now open. It is in the interest of the Soviet Union, and in our own, to seek an end to tensions. I am sure that all the nations of the West share our own desire to work together toward any agreement that can hasten lasting peace


228 - Remarks Upon Presenting Distinguished Service Medal to Adm. Harold Page Smith.
May 4, 1965

Admiral Smith was born in the month of February in the year 1904, when the first war of this century began between Russia and Japan. He entered the Naval Academy at Annapolis in the same year, 1920 that the League of Nations began its efforts to outlaw war as an instrument of national policy


246 - Address to Members of the Association of American Editorial Cartoonists: The Challenge of Human Need in Viet-Nam.
May 13, 1965

In addition, the United States is now prepared to participate in, and to support, an Asian Development Bank, to carry out and help finance the economic progress in that area of the world and the development that we desire to see in that area of the world. So this morning I callon every other industrialized nation, including the Soviet Union, to help create a better life for all of the people of southeast Asia



284 - Remarks at the Signing of the Bill Extending the Arms Control and Disarmament Act.
May 27, 1965

A United Nations resolution, supported by the United States and the Soviet Union, has put space off limits to the instruments of nuclear war



299 - Remarks in Chicago at the Cook County Democratic Party Dinner.
June 3, 1965

But there are other differences, too, between 1937 and tonight in 1965. The people of Communist countries are somewhat wiser, too. While their leaders have chosen to close a curtain about them to keep out knowledge of the free world's peaceful intention, the people of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe really know, above all other peoples on this earth, what the cost and the catastrophe is to their homeland of 20th century warfare. 
The men and women of Russia, the men and women of all the nations of Eastern Europe, I believe want peace and want the taste of its sweet fruits. And none want them to have peace more than do we, the people of the United States of America. 
Between the great powers of East and West, there is no history of conflict on the battlefields of the past. Between the people of the Soviet Union and the people of the United States, there has been friendship and there can be greater understanding. 
The common interests of the peoples of Russia and the peoples of the United States are many--and this I would say to the people of the Soviet Union tonight: There is no American interest in conflict with the Soviet people anywhere. And no true Soviet interest is going to be served by the support of aggression or subversion anywhere in the world. We of the United States of America stand ready tonight, as always, to go with you onto the fields of peace--to plow new furrows, to plant new seed, to tend new growth--so that we and so that all mankind may some day share together a new and a bountiful harvest of happiness and hope on this earth




302 - Commencement Address at Catholic University.
June 6, 1965

Peace is still a stranger, knocking at the door. 
We of America--and we of all the free world--are ready, as we are always ready, to open that door and invite peace to enter, to dwell in the house of all nations forever. 
So on this Sunday morning, as you are here to bear witness, then, I would say to the people, and to the leaders, of the Communist countries, to the Soviet Union, to nations of Eastern Europe and southeast Asia; we extend to you our invitation--come, now, let us reason together. 
As peace knocks, our door is unlatched. 
Our table is set. 
We are ready, and we believe mankind is ready with us. 
So, we wait only for those of the human family who have barred their doors and closed their windows to pull back your curtains and signify to mankind that you are ready, too, to welcome peace to the table of man. 
A great American President--Franklin Delano Roosevelt--once said, "The most serious threat to our institutions comes from those who refuse to face the need for change." 
Today, in both the open world of freedom and in the curtained world of communism, men and their families are enjoying the comfort and the contentment of a life none have ever known before. 
There is still discontent, but there is less despair. There is still need, but the wants are not so mean. There is still futility today, but there is much more faith for tomorrow. 
The most serious threat--the only threat-to this improving condition of all peoples lies with those who refuse to face the need for change, and who refuse to face the need for renouncing war in all of its ugly guises. 
The will of the world--the great and growing moral force of mankind--presses for that renunciation. For men know today, as they have not been able to know before, that war serves no necessary end of any nation anywhere on earth. 



303 - The President's Toast at a Luncheon in Honor of Sir Robert Menzies, Prime Minister of Australia.
June 7, 1965

On this same day 21 years ago, sons of all our countries were united in the great effort to push ashore in Normandy and liberate the peoples of Europe, and bring relief from the ravages of war experienced so brutally by the peoples of the Soviet. There was a common purpose then--a full unity and a full accord on our objectives. Because of that unity, and that accord, peace was finally won



