MID 427101, US v. Iraq
July 1 to July 31, 1996 – Nov 4, 1996



Remarks to the Disabled American Veterans Convention in New Orleans, Louisiana
July 28, 1996

Terrorists are often supported by states. And states that sponsor or permit terrorism, including Iraq, Iran, Libya, and Sudan, and any others, must face strong sanctions. We all have to say we cannot live with this; it is wrong. People must seek to resolve their differences by ways other than killing innocent civilians



Remarks on International Security Issues at George Washington University
August 5, 1996

Even though we're working more closely with our allies than ever and there is more agreement on what needs to be done than ever, we do not always agree. Where we don't agree, the United States cannot and will not refuse to do what we believe is right. That's why we have maintained or strengthened sanctions against states that sponsor terrorism: Iran, Iraq, Libya, and Sudan. You cannot do business with countries that practice commerce with you by day while funding or protecting the terrorists who kill you and your innocent civilians by night. That is wrong. I hope and expect that before long our allies will come around to accepting this fundamental truth.


Remarks in Troy, Tennessee
August 31, 1996
Ladies and gentlemen, before I make my remarks I want to report to you on a development in another country that you may not have heard about. Early this morning, the military forces of Iraq overran the city of Irbil, which is in the portion of northern Iraq controlled and populated by the Kurds. The situation there remains unclear. There are reports of heavy fighting and firing in populated areas. There are indications that some Kurdish elements may be involved in the operation with Iraq. These developments, however, cause me grave concern. I have placed our forces in the region on high alert, and they are now being reinforced


Remarks Announcing a Missile Strike on Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
September 3, 1996

The President. Good morning. Three days ago, despite clear warnings from the United States and the international community, Iraqi forces attacked and seized the Kurdish-controlled city of Irbil in northern Iraq. The limited withdrawals announced by Iraq do not change the reality. Saddam Hussein's army today controls Irbil, and Iraqi units remain deployed for further attacks. 
These acts demand a strong response, and they have received one. Earlier today I ordered American forces to strike Iraq. Our missiles sent the following message to Saddam Hussein: When you abuse your own people or threaten your neighbors, you must pay a price. 
It appears that one Kurdish group, which in the past opposed Saddam, now has decided to cooperate with him. But that cannot justify unleashing the Iraqi army against the civilian population of Irbil. Repeatedly over the past weeks and months we have worked to secure a lasting cease-fire between the Kurdish factions. The Iraqi attack adds fuel to the factional fire and threatens to spark instability throughout the region. 
Our objectives are limited but clear: to make Saddam pay a price for the latest act of brutality, reducing his ability to threaten his neighbors and America's interests. First, we are extending the no-fly zone in southern Iraq. This will deny Saddam control of Iraqi airspace from the Kuwaiti border to the southern suburbs of Baghdad and significantly restrict Iraq's ability to conduct offensive operations in the region. Second, to protect the safety of our aircraft enforcing this no-fly zone, our cruise missiles struck Saddam's air defense capabilities in southern Iraq. 
The United States was a cosponsor of United Nations Security Resolution 986, which allows Iraq to sell amounts of oil to purchase food and medicine for its people, including the Kurds. Irbil, the city seized by the Iraqis, is a key distribution center for this aid. Until we are sure these humanitarian supplies can actually get to those who need them, the plan cannot go forward, and the Iraqi Government will be denied the new resources it has been expecting. 
Saddam Hussein's objectives may change, but his methods are always the same: violence and aggression against the Kurds, against other ethnic minorities, against Iraq's neighbors. Our answer to that recklessness must be strong and immediate, as President Bush demonstrated in Operation Desert Storm, as we showed 2 years ago when Iraq massed its forces on Kuwait's border, and as we showed again today. 
We must make it clear that reckless acts have consequences, or those acts will increase. We must reduce Iraq's ability to strike out at its neighbors, and we must increase America's ability to contain Iraq over the long run. The steps we are taking today will further all those objectives. Time and again, Saddam Hussein has made clear his disdain for civilized behavior. He brutalized his own people, attacked his neighbors, supported terrorism, and sought to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Our policy is equally clear: When our interest in the security of our friends and allies is threatened, we will act with force if necessary. That is what we did this morning in Iraq. 
I know the thoughts and prayers of all Americans are with our military men and women who are conducting this mission. God bless them and the Nation they are serving. 
But I think it's important to move now. We have not seen any withdrawal of Saddam's forces from the area, and we know that he has a history of seeing how far he can go, taking a little and then doing a little more, taking a little and doing a little more. So I can only tell you what I believe is right and that I have done my best to cooperate with others. 
The President. Well, as always with Saddam Hussein, it depends entirely on what he does, not on what he says but what he does. And we were trying to have very limited damage to human beings and trying to take an action which would show ourresolve and would protect our planes as they fly in an expanded nofly zone. That's why the targets were picked, to make it clear what we thought and to secure the safety of the planes that will be flying the expanded no-fly zone. 
The President. The present deployments and the things that we have seen in support of them convince me that at least he has maintained the potential to take further military action in the region. That is the problem. He said, "Well, we took our soldiers out of Irbil." That's true, but look where they are and look what they're doing. And the latest reports this morning are not encouraging. 
So again, I will say to you, let's look and see what he does, and that is, I think, what should drive our actions. The words are not important; the actions are what matter.


Remarks to the National Guard Association of the United States
September 3, 1996

Ladies and gentlemen, we come here by pure coincidence at a moment when once again our Nation's military has shown its extraordinary skill and professionalism in a difficult mission in Iraq. 
Three days ago, despite clear warnings from the United States and the international community, Saddam Hussein's forces attacked and seized the Kurdish controlled city of Irbil in northern Iraq. This act is part of a broad pattern of violence and recklessness by Saddam against the Kurds, against other ethnic minorities, against Iraq's neighbors. These actions have threatened the stability of the entire region for some years now. 
This morning I ordered America's Armed Forces to strike Iraq, extending the no-fly zone and destroying Iraqi missile defenses in the south to make sure we could safely extend the no-fly zone. 
I want to reaffirm to you what I said to all the American people early this morning: Our objectives there are limited, but our interests are clear, to demonstrate once again that reckless acts have consequences, to reduce Saddam's ability to strike out again at his neighbors, to increase America's ability to prevent future acts of violence and aggression. These steps are being taken to further all of these objectives and the policy of containing Iraq that I have pursued for 4 years now, and it was developed before me under President Bush. 
We know that if we do not pursue this policy, we might once again be called upon to do more, as we had to do more in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. We do not want that to happen. And therefore, I did what I did today. I hope you will support the decision of the United States

Remarks on the Missile Strikes on Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
September 4, 1996

The President. Good afternoon. I am pleased to report that according to the information I have received from Secretary Perry today, the air strikes, the missile strikes that were conducted over the last 2 days have been successful. The targets were either destroyed or sufficiently damaged so that we can say that our mission has been achieved. That made it possible for us to implement the expanded no-fly zone today. And I want to commend the military once again for the exceptional job they have done in carrying out this mission. 
Now, what has happened is that this has changed the strategic situation, particularly in the southern part of Iraq, which Saddam used as a staging ground for his invasion of Kuwait and then in 1994 for the massing of his troops near the Kuwaiti border. He is strategically worse off than he was before these strikes began, and I am satisfied that this was an appropriate measured response. 
Obviously, we can't predict entirely what Saddam Hussein will do, but now he knows that there is a price to be paid for stepping over the line that the United Nations resolutions imposed. 
The President. I have received the reports of the explosions; I do not know anything about them. I can tell you that they are not the product of any action that we have taken. 
This was an action that I thought we had to take. It was a measured, strong, appropriate action, and I believe we did theright thing. 
The President. There was a fixing on one of our planes that occurred from a site north of the 33d parallel, but it does not. We believe we can fly this expanded no-fly zone now. It gives us an attempt to measure—or it gives us the capacity to measure what he's doing all the way up to the southern suburbs of Baghdad. So I think we're in good shape there. 
Now, we will do whatever we have to do in the future to protect our pilots and to protect their ability to fly the no-fly zone in safety. We will do whatever we have to do. But I'm satisfied that this mission has achieved the objectives we set out for it. And our defense advisers, from the Secretary of Defense to General Shalikashvili to our commander in the area, all believe that we did what was necessary, and they feel good about where we are now. 
The President. No. The key question is—well, first of all, the situation in northern Iraq seems to have changed. There has been a withdrawal of the forces, a dispersal of the forces. But it's too soon to say that this is permanent or that further action will not be taken. 
What we have done is to show that we are prepared to change the strategic realities that Saddam Hussein faces if he violates the United Nations prohibitions on either threatening his neighbors or repressing his own people. And I believe that we did theright thing. I think we had theright response, and I think it will have good results. If it doesn't, we'll take the facts as they come.





The President's Radio Address
September 7, 1996
This week our Nation's Armed Forces once again have shown their extraordinary skill and strength, this time in a critical mission in Iraq. I ordered our military to take strong action after Saddam Hussein, in the face of clear warnings from the international community, attacked and seized the Kurdish controlled city of Irbil in northern Iraq. Our missile strikes against Saddam's air defense sites in southern Iraq made it possible for us to expand the no-fly zone that has been in place over southern Iraq, the staging ground for the Kuwait invasion in 1990, and the area where Saddam massed his troops and menaced Kuwait again in 1994. 
We have denied Saddam control of the skies from the suburbs of Baghdad to the Kuwaiti border. Our action has reduced his ability to strike out against his neighbors and increased our ability to prevent future acts of violence and aggression. As a result of our efforts, Saddam is now strategically worse off than he was before he crossed the lines imposed by the international community. 
The dangers our troops face every day underscore the importance of continuing our work against the forces of destruction. In particular, we must redouble our efforts to stop the spread of weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons such as those that Iraq and other rogue nations have developed. This effort has taken on new urgency now that terrorists can also turn to chemical weapons, whose terrible impact we saw in the sarin gas attack last year in the Tokyo subway.
I ask the leaders of both parties in Congress to pull together and pass this treaty. It will make life tougher for rogue states like Iraq. Those few nations that refuse to sign will find themselves increasingly isolated. Tough new trade controls will prohibit anyone from selling them ingredients for chemical weapons, making it more difficult for them to build the weapons.


Remarks Announcing Counterterrorism Initiatives and an Exchange With Reporters
September 9, 1996

The President. Well, what we know of what is happening is that the Kurdish forces themselves are continuing to fight. Obviously, Saddam Hussein is supporting one side over another now. But the primary fight is being carried on between the Turkish forces—I mean the Kurdish forces, excuse me. We're doing everything we can to get out of Iraq American citizens and those who have worked with us. And we have done everything we could to make it clear to the Kurds that we think that there should not be any cavalier killing of civilians and others who are not combatants in this. 
As to the intelligence matters, I can't comment. But we are doing everything that we believe we can do and that we think is appropriate.


The President. I think it would be better for me not to comment now. I'd like to stay with my first statement. We're doing everything we think we can to help anybody that needs to be out of Iraq. 
The President. Well, the main thing that we wanted to say was first of all, the United States has done a great deal to help the Kurds over the years. And we've worked very hard. They make it more difficult to help them when their leaders continue to promote fights within the Kurds, within the Kurdish faction. And as you might expect, Saddam Hussein would try to take advantage of that. 
Our ability to control internal events in Iraq is limited, but what we did do, which I thought was important, was when we found that what he had done contravened the United Nations resolution and constituted repression of his own people by carrying forward the military attack on Irbil himself, what we did was to expand the no-fly zone and enforce it and take out air defenses, which means that every day he has to pay a price in terms of his capacity to maneuver in his own country and threaten his neighbors. 
And so we have done what we thought was appropriate there. I would still like to do more to help the Kurds, but frankly, if you want the fighting—for the fighting to be ended, the leaders of the various factions are going to have to be willing to go back to the peace table and talk it through. We have worked very hard with them, but that's a decision they're going to have to make, which will have a lot to do with the fate of their own people. 


Remarks on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and an Exchange With Reporters in Kansas City
September 10, 1996

The President. Well, we don't have any independent confirmation of their allegation about firing the missiles. And again I will say I will take the position that I have taken from the day I took this office: We will evaluate them based on what they do, not what they say


Remarks in Sun City, Arizona
September 11, 1996

And finally let me say on that subject, as all of you know, in recent days it became necessary for me to order our pilots to take certain actions in Iraq, to increase the chances that we could prevent Saddam Hussein from threatening his neighbors because of what he was doing to his own people. I just want to say, again, that we are going to do everything we can to make sure our own pilots are safe, that they can fly their missions in safety. We will do whateverisnecessary to protect them. And the determination of the United States in dealing with the problem of Iraq should not be underestimated. We will do what we must do to protect our people and our soldiers


Remarks in Rancho Cucamonga, California
September 12, 1996

I'm proud of the fact that there are no nuclear missiles pointed at America's children for the first time since the dawn of the nuclear age, proud that your country is leading the way to peace and prosperity. But we have more to do. We have more to do. You saw it in Iraq. We cannotallow anybody anywhere to believe they are not bound by the rules of civilized behavior.


The President's Radio Address
September 14, 1996
Good morning. Today I know the thoughts and prayers of every American are with our men and women in uniform serving in the Persian Gulf, standing up for America's interests. I want to speak with you about why 10 days ago I ordered our Armed Forces to strike Iraq, what we have accomplished, and where we go from here. 
America's vitalinterests in the Persian Gulf are constant and clear: to help protect our friends in the region against aggression, to work with others in the fight against terrorism, to preserve the free flow of oil, and to build support for a comprehensive Middle East peace. Any group or nation that threatens the stability of the region threatens those interests. 
For the past 5 years, Saddam Hussein has repeatedly threatened the stability of the Persian Gulf and our allies Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. Time and again, he has lashed out recklessly against his neighbors and against his own people. America's policy has been to contain Saddam, to reduce the threat he poses to the region, and to do it in a way that makes him pay a price when he acts recklessly. That is why when Saddam sent his troops into the Kurdish city of Irbil in northern Iraq 2 weeks ago, we responded strongly, immediately, and strategically. 
If we had failed to answer Saddam's provocation, he would have been emboldened to act even more recklessly and in a manner more dangerous to our interests. That is why we did respond and why we did so in a way that made our interests more secure. We acted in southern Iraq, where our interests are the most vital and where we had the capacity to increase the international community's ability to deter aggression by Saddam against his neighbors. 
I ordered the attacks in order to extend the no-fly zone in Iraq, the air space through which Iraq's military is notallowed to fly. Now we control the skies over Iraq from the border of Kuwait to the southern suburbs of Baghdad. This action tightened the strategic straitjacket on Saddam, making it harder for him to threaten Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and easier for us to stop him if he does. In so doing, we advanced America's fundamental interests in the region. 
Of course, our interests also must include protecting the safety of our own pilots who are patrolling the expanded no-fly zone. That is why our cruise missiles struck the bulk of Saddam's air defense system in southern Iraq. The United States will take whatever stepsarenecessary to protect our pilots as they enforce the expanded no-fly zone and to defend our strategic interests. I have ordered sufficient forces to the region to give us that capability. 

Remarks on the Elections in Bosnia and an Exchange With Reporters
September 15, 1996

The President. I can't confirm that now.
The President. Well, I believe that he's in better shape than he was the day after the Gulf war in 1991, but strategically I do not believe he is stronger because of the expansion of the no-fly zone. I think the expansion of the nofly zone was designed to do one thing and one thing only: to increase our capacity to monitor and to limit his ability to threaten his neighbors in light of his increased aggressiveness. And I think that we will achieve that and I think we are achieving that and that was exactly what we set out to achieve. 
But he was not taken out of office in the Gulf war. He has managed to survive, and he is still in power. But the important thing for the United States is that he not be able to threaten his neighbors and to do what was done in 1991 in the Gulf war. We don't want to have to do that all over again, and that's what we're trying to avoid. And I believe we have taken an appropriate step to do that


Remarks on Accepting a Report on Anticrime Initiatives and an Exchange With Reporters
September 16, 1996

The President. Let me answer you as clearly as I can. We have sought no confrontation with Saddam Hussein; we never did, and we don't now. We do seek to enforce the no-fly zone and to do it under conditions in which our pilots will be safe. And I will do the very best I can to make theright judgment on that question, listening to my military advisers about the facts. 
And that is the only answer I can give you to that question. My concern is that we limit Saddam Hussein's ability to threaten his neighbors, that we do it with the no-fly zone, and that in doing so we keep our pilots safe


Remarks Announcing Pension Portability Regulations and an Exchange With Reporters
September 17, 1996

The President. Thank you. Thank you, Secretary Rubin, and thank you, Trisha, for that comment. I want to speak about this at some length but let me first of all say I think all of you know that this morning I had an opportunity to meet with congressional leadership to review with them what we have accomplished in Iraq and where we are going. 
I believe we all agreed that Saddam Hussein's seizure of Irbil and movement in the northern part of Iraq after being warned not to do it by the United States and the world community required response. The response that we gave was one designed to improve the strategic position of the United States and our allies, to keep Saddam Hussein in a box, and to limit his ability to threaten his neighbors. That is a smaller box now because we have extended the no-fly zone. And we have also put Saddam Hussein on notice that we do not want him to take any actions that would increase the dangers to our pilots
The President. Well, let's take them each in turn here. First of all, I think the response that we selected was entirely appropriate under the circumstances. This will partly answer the second one. Keep in—here is what happened; this was a complicated matter. The United States and the entire world community told Saddam Hussein, you know, don't invade, in effect, the Kurdish communities in northern Iraq; yes, they're in your country, but part of the United Nation resolution was that you should not repress your people. Now, the situation was considerably complicated by the fact that the leader of one of the Kurdish factions actually asked him to do it, wanted to make, if you will, a temporary marriage. So he did it. 
From our point of view, it still constituted a violation of the U.N. resolution; plus which, the United States cannot be in the position after years and years and years of dealing with Saddam Hussein in which it's obvious that he's always pushing the envelope of saying don't do this and then have him do it and we did nothing. I mean, a lot of people would say well, "We ought to just take a pass on this. After all, it's just the Kurds. They're divided. He's not invading a country beyond his borders." But to us it was more serious than that because we didn't want to create a precedent in which— which could lead him to believe that he could take further action. There is still a lot of debate about whether 5 or 6 years ago he was somehow misled by actions of others into thinking he could take over Kuwait with no consequences. So we didn't want there to be any ambiguity at all. 
Therefore, I believe that—I will say again— I told Senator Lott this this morning, my view is that the action we took was appropriate because it would not have been appropriate for the United States to send ground forces into northern Iraq to try to throw Saddam out of northern Iraq. We could have done that, of course, but it would have been at a very high price. It was inappropriate. 
It would not have been appropriate for us to takeaction that would have cost the lives of a lot of civilians in that country. What we did was appropriate. What we did by extending the no-fly zone is to say, "We want you to understand, we have no intention of permitting you to threaten your neighbors. We're going to limit your ability to maneuver. The box you are in is now a tighter box." I still believe it was theright thing to do. 
In terms of northern Iraq, is he in a stronger position today? He's in a weaker position in southern Iraq and a weaker position to threaten his neighbors. Yes, he has his army deployed in areas of northern Iraq that they weren't there a few weeks ago. But I would remind you, there are a lot of shifting sands in the Kurdish political scene. And as the Secretary of State cautioned the Members of Congress today, if you look at where these Kurdish leaders are coming out, I think it is unlikely that there will be any profound, lasting benefits to him from what he has done in the north. 
I think it is perfectly clear that there are some significant disadvantages in the south, in the areas where we have the greatest interests, including his ability to threaten either Kuwait or Saudi Arabia. 
The President. Well, my rhetoric has been very careful. I think if you go back and look at exactly what I said, I think my actions and my rhetoric have been very closely calibrated. I've been very careful not to try to run this up the rhetorical flagpole. 

Remarks on Signing the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 and an Exchange With Reporters
September 23, 1996

This month our Nation has again been reminded of the extraordinary skill and dedication of our Armed Forces. In Iraq our men and women in uniform have shown their strength in advancing our strategic interests. In Bosnia our troops and their IFOR counterparts have helped to make possible the elections which mark another milestone on the road of that nation's recovery

I believe that things are proceeding reasonably well now in Iraq, based on what I know today. I feel good about that. I think the United States should pay its U.N. dues. We're going to pay our dues this year, and we'll start to pay our debts on a regular basis until we get our debt paid back. I think we ought to, and I've always felt that, as you know.


Remarks to the 51st Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 24, 1996

Real zero tolerance requires us to isolate states that refuse to play by the rules we have all accepted for civilized behavior. As long as Iraq threatens its neighbors and people, as long as Iran supports and protects terrorists, as long as Libya refuses to give up the people who blew up Pan Am 103, they should not become full members of the family of nations




Presidential Debate in Hartford
October 6, 1996
The President. Well, I believe that we did the appropriate thing under the circumstances. 
Saddam Hussein is under a U.N. resolution not to threaten his neighbors or repress his own citizens. Unfortunately, a lot of people have never been as concerned about the Kurds as the United States has tried to be, and we've been flying an operation to protect them out of Turkey for many years now. 
What happened was, one of the Kurdish leaders invited him to go up north. But we felt, since the whole world community had told him not to do it, that once he did it we had to do something. We did not feel that I could commit—I certainly didn't feel I should commit American troops to throw him out of where he had gone, and that was the only way to do that. So the appropriate thing strategically to do was to reduce his ability to threaten his neighbors. We did that by expanding what's called the no-fly zone, by increasing our allies' control of the airspace, now from the Kuwait border to the suburbs of Baghdad. 
Was it theright thing to do? I believe it was. Is it fully effective? Did it make him withdraw from the north? Well, he has a little bit, and I hope he will continue. We have learned that if you give him an inch he'll take a mile. We had to do something. And even though not all of our allies supported it at first, I think most of them now believe that what we did was an appropriate thing to do
The President. Sometimes the United States has to act alone, or at least has to act first. Sometimes we cannot let other countries have a veto on our foreign policy. I could not send soldiers into the north of Iraq; that would have been wrong. I could reduce Saddam Hussein's ability to threaten Kuwait and his other neighbors again. That's what I did. I still believe it was theright thing to do.



Remarks at a Brunch for Representative Robert Torricelli in Teaneck, New Jersey
October 20, 1996

The President. Let's talk about what she— number one, we have not killed a million people with our blockade of Iraq. The Iraqis—Saddam Hussein could have had food and medicine for his children 3 years ago, and he refused to take it. That's one of the biggest lies I ever heard. Saddam Hussein is oppressing his people, we're not. Secondly, Fidel Castro had Americans murdered illegally, and that was wrong, too. And I'm proud that we have a blockade against people who kill innocent Americans.



