MID 355201, US v. Iraq
May 28 to June 27, 1992 – Dec 23, 1993



The President's News Conference
June 4, 1992
The President. I respond that that's not right. As I said at my last press conference, we tried, not through strengthening his nuclear or biological or chemical weapons has been alleged, not by giving him part of Kuwait has been alleged, but we tried to work with him on grain credits and things of this nature to avoid aggressive action. And it failed. It failed. That approach, holding out a hand, trying to get him to renounce terrorism and join the family of nations didn't work. And the minute he moved aggressively, we moved aggressively and set back aggression. 
You've got a lot of people that opposed what happened on the war, stood there and didn't want to move, that are now trying to revise history. So I am not persuaded by the critics at all. I know what we did. There wasn't anything illegal. We tried hard, and I've said so. It didn't work, but we were not going to let aggression stand. When he moved into Kuwait, I decided this will not stand, and it didn't


The President's News Conference in Rio de Janeiro
June 13, 1992

Why the Congress keeps spending the taxpayers' monies on these witch hunts, I do not know. I'm a little sick of it, but there's not a heck of a lot I can do about it except to express a continual and somewhat mounting frustration as I see now another attack. Our policy was well-known. We tried to bring Saddam Hussein into the family of nations. That policy was not successful. We did not enhance his nuclear, biological, or chemical weapon capability, a charge recklessly made in this political year. When we failed and when he took an aggression, the whole world joined with us in standing against it. Now some of the very people that opposed U.S. action are trying to redeem themselves by a lot of political inquiry. And I don't think the American people are going to stand for it


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the Agriculture Communicators Congress
June 30, 1992

I might add something on that. I hope it doesn't sound too defensive. I see a lot of revisionists talking about Iraq now. We did try through using agricultural credits to encourage Saddam Hussein to join the family of nations. I remember a lot of support in agricultural America at the time. Now, a lot of people that opposed me on Desert Storm have a kind of revisionistic view of things, and they're trying to make it that this was wrong and that this gave him the funds to buy bombs or something of that nature. It isn't. The policy did not work, and we did what we had to do to stand up against aggression


Exchange With Reporters on Iraq
July 21, 1992

The President. I only saw a wire service report. And they have no confirmation of that at all. 

The President. We want Iraq to comply with the United Nations resolution. And we are insisting that they comply with the U.N. resolution. But I know nothing about the other at all. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters on Arrival From Camp David, Maryland
July 26, 1992

The President. I have two brief statements. In addition to yesterday's meeting with our national security advisers on the situation in Iraq, which has been widely reported, I spent considerable time today reviewing the antidrug fight in our communities.

Now, on Iraq: Iraq's belated announcement that it will allow the United Nations Special Commission to carry out an inspection of the Agricultural Ministry in Baghdad does not alter the fact that for some 3 weeks Saddam Hussein flagrantly violated U.N. Security Council Resolution 687. Nor does this announcement change the fact that Iraq deliberately and callously harassed and abused the U.N. inspectors seeking to carry out their mandate. That mandate: Immediate, unimpeded, unconditional, unrestricted access to any site the U.N. deems warranted for inspection. 
And yes, now, once again, Saddam Hussein has caved in. While Saddam has bent to the will of the U.N., the question remains whether after this delay a truly effective inspection of the Ministry is still possible. The real test of his behavior will be in future U.N. inspections. Behavior along the lines we've just witnessed will not be tolerated. 
Saddam has long pursued a pattern of willful noncompliance and obstruction of the United Nations Special Commission. For over a year he has lied about the extent of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction programs and sought to conceal them from the United Nations and the International Atomic Energy Agency. Now, this is unacceptable. Iraq must and will be held to the standard of full compliance with Security Council Resolution 687. 
Saddam's violation of the will of the international community, as expressed in the United Nations Security Council resolutions, continues in other important areas. Iraq has refused to participate in the work of the Iraq-Kuwait Border Commission. Iraq has refused to account for Kuwaiti citizens seized during the occupation of the emirate and to return property that was stolen by the occupiers. Iraq has not renewed the memorandum of understanding with the U.N. and has stepped up its harassment of U.N. officials and humanitarian agencies operating in the country. 
Saddam has stepped up his persecution of the Iraqi people in flagrant violation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 688, including recent use of jet fighters against the Shia and maintaining a blockade of the Kurds. Iraq has refused to accept U.N. Security Council Resolutions 706 and 712, which would allow for that sale of oil for food and medicine, choosing instead to have the Iraqi people suffer unnecessarily, denying them food. 
The international community cannot tolerate continued Iraqi defiance of the United Nations and the rule of law. There is too much at stake for the region, for the United Nations, and for the world
The President. No, we support Dr. Ekeus. He has our full respect and confidence. So that inspection will go forward, belatedly so, but it will go forward. 
The President. Some kind of threat? 
The President. I don't know that any more is required right at this minute. I think everyone knows that we are determined to see these resolutions complied with. We are in very close touch with our allies. This standoff now has been resolved by his caving in, by his backing down in spite of bluster and threats to the contrary. But there are many other inspections to come. 
The President. Well, the way to end the crisis is for him to fully comply with these resolutions I outlined. Until then there will be a lot of tension because the whole world is now more determined than ever to see that he does comply. So I can't say there's no reason for concern anymore at all. There's plenty of reason. 
The President. Well, normally I don't discuss the deployment of military forces, and I'm inclined to stay with that right now. I don't think there will be any drastic changes in existing plans. 
The President. You can interpret it any way you want. All I'm trying to do is express the unanimous determination of the Security Council. 
The President. I say to him, if it's not over, he better hope it is. 
The President. No, Saddam Hussein is a threat to the Iraqi people. He's a threat to his own people. He's brutalizing his own people in failing to comply. He is a threat to peace and security in the area. There's no question about all of that. Our argument is not with the Iraqi people. I've said that since day one of all of this. I will repeat it here today: Our argument is with Saddam Hussein, the bully, the dictator, the brutal merchant of death. And that's it. It is not with the Iraqi people. And once again, he has caved in after a lot of bluster. 
But all I want to do here is express for the United States our determination to see him comply with these resolutions. We haven't forgotten, and nor have the other members of the Security Council. So against a solid wall, he once again caved in. I guess there's a certain humiliation factor for him with his own people. But I would simply say we've just got to look ahead now and see that other inspections go forward and that he complies with these resolutions, the subject of which I discussed here a few minutes ago. 
The President. I haven't threatened or changed anything. The options that the United States and our partners have available to us are well-known. Let's just see that he complies with the resolutions. I'm not here to threaten. I'm simply here to say that I'm glad that he cratered once again on this threatening, but to reiterate our determination to see these resolutions complied with. That's all that this is about, and it's got to be done in timely fashion. 
There will be another occasion along the line here because there are other inspections that will take place. So we just have to keep plugging ahead to be sure this man does what international law calls for him to do. 


Remarks to Shaw Industries Employees in Dalton
August 3, 1992

I've seen this every day for 3 1/2 years as President. I heard a certain southern Governor say the other day that this country was being ridiculed around the world. Well, I suspect -- and I'm not going to name names quite yet -- I suspect that he hasn't been around much. I'd like to have him walk the streets of Warsaw, as I did a few days ago, or Moscow or maybe sit down with Boris Yeltsin or Helmut Kohl or Miyazawa or a myriad of leaders south of our border. And they'd tell him what you and I already know: The United States is the undisputed leader of the world. That did not happen by accident. It happened by leadership and by the sons and daughters of America doing what they had to do, from Iraq all the way across a major spectrum of other places. It's the spirit of the United States. To tear down this country, to stand there and try to make the American people think we're a second-rate power, they simply don't understand the greatness of the United States of America.


Remarks on the Situation in Bosnia and an Exchange With Reporters in Colorado Springs
August 6, 1992

The President. Well, I think what he said, they would notbeallowed into the ministries. I would say that the United Nations resolutions will be honored in full and he will comply with United Nations resolutions, and just leave it at that. I can't tell you what the inspection targets will be, but if they prove to be in the ministry, the United Nations has every right under international law to inspect. And we will help guarantee that right. 
The President. I've been fedup with him for a long time. 


The President's News Conference
August 7, 1992

Finally, we continue to work with the United Nations to monitor the situation in Iraq. We have great confidence in Mr. Ekeus and his inspection team as they pursue compliance with the United Nations resolutions. Once again, we're hearing the bluster of Saddam Hussein. He speaks of Kuwait as the 19th province, and he threatens not to allow inspection of his ministries. We will continue to demand full compliance with all resolutions, but we will speak with the measured confidence of a nation and a community of nations that is totally dedicated to seeing every single one of these United Nations resolutions fully enforced

The President. Well, I think the answer is overall he is going to comply with the U.N. resolutions, and that is just going to happen. So I can't tell how much of this is bluster, how much on their part is determination to provoke confrontation. But they're going to comply with these resolutions. I'm absolutely certain of that. 
The President. No. I think we have great confidence in Dr. Ekeus. He is a very persistent individual. The timetable as I understand it, which I'm not at liberty to discuss, seems to me appropriate to get to the bottom of all this, fulfill all these inspections


But when it comes to a serious foreign policy initiative, I'm going to do my level-best to keep it out of the political arena. It is too very, very important that we conduct ourselves, whether it's in Iraq or whether it's in Bosnia, without kind of political leanings, and I'm going to do that. Therefore, I'm not going to answer questions that relate to his charge or trying to come back with some countercharge.


Remarks on the Resignation of James A. Baker III as Secretary of State
August 13, 1992

He was central to our efforts to assemble an unparalleled U.N. coalition against Iraq. He's made great progress towards transforming victory on the battlefield into a broader peace between Israelis and Arabs. During his tenure we totally transformed our relationship with the Soviet Union, bringing the cold war to a peaceful end. He negotiated deep cuts in the nuclear weapons, conventional weapons as well. In so doing, he helped establish a vastly safer security structure on which to build a new Euro-Atlantic community and protection against the plague of proliferation. In helping to overcome the division of Europe, he helped lead the way for the unification of Germany. He helped silence the wars in Central America by building policies around democracy and the power of the ballot box.


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters on Iraq
August 16, 1992

The President. Well, there's currently a good deal of speculation about potential U.N. inspections and then possible military measures in Iraq and alleged political motivations. I'm not going to comment on today's speculative stories, except to say I saw quite a few inaccuracies. 
From now on, some will accuse us of political opportunism for every move I make, and that's unfortunate. But it is not going to deter me from doing what is right, regardless of the political fallout. We're determined that U.N. Resolution 687 will be fully implemented. Now, this requires U.N. teams to inspect and destroy the Iraqi network of weapons of mass destruction: nuclear, chemical, biological, and missile. 
I have total confidence in Rolf Ekeus of the United Nations and of the U.N. teams who have the responsibility for this mission. Let me make clear that what they elect to inspect and when they do these inspections is strictly their decision. The U.S. role is to provide support for their efforts. 
Saddam Hussein needs to realize that the world will not ignore interference with these U.N. requirements. He cannotbeallowed to dictate what can and cannot be inspected. 
The President. No, I won't, because the U.N. makes these decisions. Dr. Ekeus makes these calls. He has our full confidence, and what he plans to do next is his business. That is not something that's done by the United States. 
The President. The United States has plans to be sure that Saddam Hussein does what he's supposed to do, and that is to comply with Resolution 687 and also 688, which refers to the brutalization of his own people. 
The President. The campaign and the convention have nothing to do with this. This is the national security interests of the United States. This is obligations to support the United Nations. So I'm glad you raised it, Randall [Randall Pinkston, CBS News]. But I will repeat it: I have responsibilities as President and responsibilities as Commander in Chief. I will go through with those responsibilities regardless of the politics. That is a very important point in all of this, and I hope I have demonstrated that enough to earn the trust of the American people when it comes to making this kind of decision. I do not make decisions involving military force lightly. I've been there myself. I know what it's like. I don't commit somebody else's son or daughter to battle or to any kind of combat unless it is theright thing to do, regardless of politics. 
The President. I have said before, all options are open. That's all I'll say. 


Remarks to the Veterans of Foreign Wars National Convention in Indianapolis, Indiana
August 17, 1992

What a group we've put forth, these sons and daughters of Paterson and Peoria, you who wrote, some of you, "Kilroy was here" on the walls of the German stalags and left signs in the Iraqi desert that said, "I saw Elvis" -- [laughter] -- and you who sang "Don't Sit Under the Apple Tree" on the roads outside London and listened to the Beatles with Chris Noel and Adrian Cronauer in Saigon


Remarks to the American Legion National Convention in Chicago, Illinois
August 25, 1992

Take Iraq as a test case for the most difficult security challenges we are likely to face in the future. We tried peaceful means to bring Iraq into the family of nations. Given the dangerous neighbors, given the vitalinterests at stake, it was right to try. Had we not made those efforts, had we not exhausted every peaceful means, we would never have been able to build the unprecedented United Nations coalition that stopped a tyrant in his tracks and rolled him back to Baghdad. 
Now, let's also get straight what was at stake: A madman with missiles and chemical weapons stood on the brink of a choke-hold on much of the world's energy supplies, threatening to overrun our allies. We destroyed that threat, liberated Kuwait, and locked up a tyrant in the prison of his own country. We know now Saddam Hussein was developing the weapons to destroy Israel. Tens of millions of deaths of Arabs or Israelis would not matter to this killer. The Middle East could well have become a nuclear apocalypse. That is what was at stake. 
Now, some who were faint-hearted and stood in the way of crushing Saddam's aggression now have the gall to say, "You stopped the war too soon." Some also say that General Norman Schwarzkopf wanted to march into Baghdad and "get" Saddam. False! I'll never forget -- this is a true story and history has it recorded on film -- sitting in the Oval Office on February 27, 1991, our troops having performed so magnificently in the field. And with me in the room was General Scowcroft and the Secretary of Defense, Dick Cheney, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Colin Powell. They recommended to me, as President who has the responsibility for this, that we stop the slaughter; our mission was accomplished. I asked, are you sure that our field commanders feel this way? They both said yes. But to double-check, Colin Powell got up from the couch in our office -- you all have seen pictures of it -- walked over to the desk that you see pictures of, reached into the front right-hand corner of the desk, and there was a secure telephone; picked up that secure phone and got General Schwarzkopf on the line in my presence. And General Powell looked up at me after he had talked to Schwarzkopf, and he said, "Mission accomplished. Stop the killing." 
And it was right. We are not in the slaughter business. We were in the business of crushing aggression. And we did it. And I don't like this historical revision. We did theright thing; we did the compassionate thing in the end as well. If we'd continued, hundreds of thousands of American troops would be on the ground in Iraq today attempting to pull warring factions together or bogged down in some guerrilla warfare. Whether in Korea or in Lebanon, history shows us the danger of losing sight of our objectives. Liberators can easily become occupiers. A Commander in Chief has to know not only when his objectives have been reached but when to consolidate his gains. 
Instead of playing the world's policeman, we worked with the United Nations to destroy Iraq's remaining weapons of mass destruction, to keep Iraq under control. Through an embargo, through tight control over oil exports and U.N. inspections, we are putting the lid on Saddam. And believe me, he is going to live up to each and every one of those U.N. resolutions. I am determined to see that, and I will. 
There will be other regional conflicts. There will be other Saddam Husseins. Look around the world. Look at the threats we face: terrorism, the terrible drug cartels, regional conflicts as the breakup of empire gives vent to ancient hatreds, the spread of nuclear and chemical weapons. From Qadhafi in Libya to Kim Il-song in North Korea, the threats on our horizon could look a lot like the threat we turned back in Iraq. 

Remarks on Hurricane Andrew and the Situation in Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
August 26, 1992

Now I want to turn to the situation in Iraq. In recent weeks and months we have heard and seen new evidence of harsh repression by the government of Saddam Hussein against the men, women, and children of Iraq. What emerges from eyewitness accounts, as well as from the detailed August 11th testimony before the United Nations Security Council of U.N. human rights envoy Max van der Stoel, is further graphic proof of Saddam's brutality. 
We now know of Saddam's use of helicopters and, beginning this spring, fixed-wing aircraft to bomb and strafe civilians and villages there in the south, his execution last month of merchants in Baghdad, and his gradual tightening of the economic blockade against the people of the north. These reports are further confirmation that the Government of Iraq is failing to meet its obligations under United Nations Security Council Resolution 688. 
This resolution, passed in April of 1991, demands that Saddam Hussein end repression of the Iraqi people. By denying access to U.N. human rights monitors and other observers, Saddam has sought to prevent the world from learning of his brutality. Itistime to ensure the world does know. 
Therefore, the United States and its coalition partners have today informed the Iraqi Government that 24 hours from now coalition aircraft, including those of the United States, will begin flying surveillance missions in southern Iraq, south of the 32 degrees north latitude, to monitor the situation there. This will provide coverage of the areas where a majority of the most significant recent violations of Resolution 688 have taken place. 
The coalition is also informing Iraq's Government that in order to facilitate these monitoring efforts it is establishing a no-fly zone for all Iraqi fixed- and rotary-wing aircraft. This new prohibition will also go into effect in 24 hours over this same area. It will remain in effect until the coalition determines that it is no longer required. 
It will be similar to the no-fly zone the coalition imposed on northern Iraq more than a year ago. I want to emphasize that these actions are designed to enhance our ability to monitor developments in southern Iraq. These actions are consistent with longstanding U.S. policy toward Iraq. We seek Iraq's compliance, not its partition. 
The United States continues to support Iraq's territorial unity and bears no ill will towards its people. We continue to look forward to working with a new leadership in Baghdad, one that does not brutally suppress its own people and violate the most basic norms of humanity. Until that day no one should doubt our readiness to respond decisively to Iraq's failure to respect the no-fly zone. 
Moreover, the United States and our coalition partners are prepared to consider additional steps should Saddam continue to violate this or other U.N. resolutions. 
The President. Well, one peg is the report from this U.N. official, Mr. van der Stoel, and I think that gets things in focus. Then the other side of it is we've had rather intensive consultations on this to be sure that we are operating in the coalition. I still think that's very important. 
The President. Well, they've already taken some steps there. That is a matter of concern because I think that just further antagonizes, properly so, the United Nations against them. But whether there's any steps, I don't know that he'd be foolish enough to take any steps as it relates to this no-fly zone. 
The President. Well, we are not -- that's hypothetical, and I just hope that that doesn't occur. But quite obviously, we would be extraordinarily concerned about that because that would be in violation of 688, as this use of these planes is. So we just have to wait and see what further action might be taken. 
The President. No. And as I said in my statement, we do not. 
On the separation, I'd like to leave that question to Ed to answer as to whether these Shiites are pro-Iran. They're Iraqi, and we do not want to see the partition of Iraq. 


Remarks to General Dynamics Employees in Fort Worth, Texas
September 2, 1992

Throughout this century, the marvels of American defense have saved lives, kept the peace, and defended American values. The world has seen the F - 16 in action. Over the skies of Desert Storm the F - 16 continued America's tradition of military excellence in more than 13,000 combat sorties. At this very moment planes like these may well be flying over Iraq to guarantee that the bully of Baghdad, Saddam Hussein, will not brutalize his own people by striking at them from the skies.


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the B'nai B'rith International Convention
September 8, 1992

And here's another fact: When the chips were down, when many countries, including Israel, were threatened by the most brutal aggression, America was there. We stopped Saddam Hussein. And that terrible time when the world feared that the cold war would be replaced by a new age of Saddam, that is over, too. I knew when I took the oath of office that every President faces difficult decisions. And I can tell you this: There is no decision more difficult than sending this country's young men and women into combat, sending somebody else's son or daughter to possible death. In the end, it comes down to this: You cannot make that kind of decision unless you are certain you understand what is at stake. I knew what was at stake. And because of the bravery of America's sons and daughters in Desert Storm, America today is safer and Israel today is safer. 
Ask yourself this question, where the Middle East would be today, where Israel's security would be today if we had followed the counsel of my critics. Ask yourself where we would be if we had someone in the Oval Office who would have waffled, who would have wavered and wanted to have it both ways. Listen to my opponent's very own words on whether he would have followed my lead and drawn a line in the sand. And here is the exact quotation: "I guess I would have voted with the majority if it was a close vote. But I agree with the arguments the minority made." Where would we be? I'll tell you. We would be facing a nuclear-armed Iraq, dominant in the Middle East, with a chokehold on the world's oil supplies; an Iraq that showed clearly to the rest of the world that aggression against one's neighbors can go unchecked; an Iraq threatening Israel's very existence. Israel's very survival would be at stake. And we'd be talking about whether there was any chance to avoid nuclear Armageddon in the Middle East. Well, Desert Storm swept away that nightmare. And because of America's courage, today we now have the chance to see the dawn of peace in the Middle East. 
There is still lots of work to be done. The Middle East, indeed, the world, is still a dangerous place. Terrorists continue to target the innocent. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction casts a cloud over the region's future. Iraq's Saddam Hussein, however much weaker, defeated, and locked in the prison of his own country, still brutalizes his own people, resists the will of the international community


Remarks to the National Guard Association in Salt Lake City, Utah
September 15, 1992

In August of 1990, within days of my decision to draw a line in the sand, more than 4,000 volunteers from National Guard units all across America were activated, airborne and on the way to the Persian Gulf, the first of 767 National Guard units called up during Desert Storm. And when American troops rolled across the Iraqi border, and I'll never forget that day, the National Guard was among the very first to cross.


Address to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 21, 1992

I also callfor the indefinite renewal of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty when it is reviewed in 1995. I believe we must explore ways that we can strengthen linkages between these suppliers' clubs, the Nuclear Suppliers Group, Australia Group, and the Missile Technology Control Regime, and specialized U.N. agencies. Here, I would like to note UNSCOM's productive efforts to dismantle the Iraqi weapons of mass destruction program and the International Atomic Energy Agency's continuing good work.

Since World War II, foreign assistance often served as a weapon in the cold war. Obviously, we will still use critical foreign assistance funds to meet legitimate security needs. As our humanitarian operations in Somalia and northern Iraq, Bosnia, and the former Soviet Union will testify, we will continue our robust humanitarian assistance efforts to help those suffering from manmade and natural disasters


Remarks to the Community in Fort Lauderdale, Florida
October 3, 1992

Just 2 days ago in Wisconsin, he read a speech on foreign policy. It sort of sounded like a college term paper. Governor Clinton said, and I quote -- this has to do with the war in Iraq -- he said, "I supported the President when it became necessary to evict Saddam Hussein from Kuwait." He said that the other day. But last year, here's what he said, "I guess I would have voted with the majority if it was a close vote, but I agree with the arguments that the minority made


Presidential Debate in East Lansing, Michigan
October 19, 1992

President Bush. It's awful easy when you're dealing with 90/90 hindsight. We did try to bring Saddam Hussein into the family of nations. He did have the fourth largest army. All our Arab allies out there thought we ought to do just exactly that. When he crossed the line, I stood up and looked into the camera and I said, "This aggression will not stand." We formed a historic coalition, and we brought him down. We destroyed the fourth largest army, and the battlefield was searched, and there wasn't one single iota of evidence that any U.S. weapons were on that battlefield. The nuclear capability has been searched by the United Nations, and there hasn't been one single scintilla of evidence that there's any U.S. technology involved in it. 
What you're seeing on all this Iraqgate is a bunch of people who were wrong on the war trying to cover their necks here and try to do a little revisionism. I cannot let that stand, because it isn't true. Yes, we had grain credits for Iraq, and there isn't any evidence that those grain credits were diverted into weaponry, none, none whatsoever. And so I just have to say it's fine. You can't say there, Governor Clinton, and say, "Well, I think I have supported the minority" -- let sanctions work or wish that it would go away -- "but I would have voted with the majority." Come on, that's not leadership



Question-and-Answer Session in Atlanta, Georgia
October 20, 1992

The President. I heard what he said. He also strongly opposed the war, and he said that we had not leveled with the American people on the Glaspie -- that was Ambassador Glaspie. Let me tell you something. Every single paper, including Secretary of State's notes, which is unprecedented, was taken up to the United States Congress and looked at in detail. And after the event, Secretary Baker went and explained that to Mr. Perot, who said he hadn't known that. 
So I hope that one is cleared up, because you had congressional hearing after congressional hearing. My position on Iraq was we did try to make Saddam Hussein into somebody a little more sane. You know, when the war in Iran and Iraq ended, Saddam Hussein had the fourth largest army. Our Arab friends were saying, "Try to bring him along. We don't need a radical in our midst. Try to help him." We had letters, incidentally, from many of the people now critical on trying to sell American grain to Iraq, including the two Senators from Arkansas: "Please sell grain to Iraq on credit." 


Question-and-Answer Session in Secaucus, New Jersey
October 22, 1992

The President. I believe this is dual-use equipment. I believe this is dual use that was cleared. If it's not, somebody screwed up, or somebody took equipment that shouldn't have been shipped over there, or not. We never, ever tried to support Saddam Hussein in building his nuclear capability. It is the United States that guarantees he doesn't have one. 
So if there was some high-level, you know, just really special level technology that got there, it got there without the knowledge of the United States. But what I saw today -- I don't know about the Bergen Record -- was dual-use tech -- have you got what kind of equipment it was? 
The President. Okay, well, if it was licensed, that's dual use. I have no problem with that. 
The President. Okay. If it was dual use, it can have a civilian use and others. Some equipment did this. Some computers were in that category. But if it was designed strictly to build up a nuclear capability, it shouldn't be there, and I hope none was there. That's what I was talking about, and I hope it didn't get there. 
The President. No, I don't think it was naive if the equipment itself is not going to enhance his nuclear capability. I don't think so. 
But look, we were trying to bring him into the family of nations. They just finished a war. He had the fourth biggest army in the world. Our friends over in that part of the country who became our allies thought we were too tough on him, thought we were going to drive him into a more totalitarian position. And we had a good program. It included sending grain over there. And it didn't work. The guy then went in and took Kuwait, and we knocked his brains out. 
And you've got a lot of Democrats who didn't want to move at all down there trying to make something to cover their own necks and trying to make it look like they were right all along. If I had listened to them, Saddam Hussein would be in downtown Riyadh in Saudi Arabia, and he'd have had a nuclear weapon. So we tried; didn't work. Admit it, go on and do your business. In this case, put him back in his box and destroy the fourth largest army. 

Remarks to the Community in Stratford, Connecticut
November 1, 1992

You know, the world is still a dangerous place, and I think we've got to remember that. Who knows where the next crisis is going to come from? You know, I loved this yesterday, the message out of Baghdad. I don't know if they covered it in the Connecticut papers. Saddam Hussein's government is planning a party for 500,000 people in downtown Baghdad predicated on the fact that I'm going to lose. They're wrong. No party. No loss. A big win. A big win. And we are going to keep the pressure on the Bully of Baghdad. We are going to keep the pressure on him until he lives up to every single United Nations resolution; until we can bring peace and relief to his people, the people of Iraq. Stay strong. Do not vacillate.


Remarks on Arrival in Akron, Ohio
November 2, 1992

There was a very interesting announcement out of Baghdad, of all places, the other day, that Saddam Hussein's government is planning a party -- they said 500,000 people -- if Governor Clinton wins. Well, Saddam, put it on hold, old fellow, because we are going to make you live up to every resolution passed by the United Nations. We're going to make you lighten up on the people of Iraq


Remarks on Arrival in Louisville, Kentucky
November 2, 1992

Hey, the good one happened the other day. Maybe you didn't see it in the press; I did. Don't read it too much anymore, but I saw this one -- [laughter] -- this one said that Saddam Hussein's government plans a party of 500,000 people when George Bush loses. Saddam, put it on hold, old friend. We're going to come after you until you lighten up on the people of Iraq. We are going to make you live by the United Nations resolutions. He's not going to get rid of us. We're going to keep to it until he does what's right by his people. Frankly, I couldn't care less whether he's unhappy if I win. That doesn't bother me one single bit


Remarks at a Rally in Houston, Texas
November 2, 1992

The President. Did you see the dispatch out of Baghdad a couple of days ago? Saddam Hussein is said to be planning a party in the streets of Baghdad for 500,000 Iraqis if we lose. But tonight I have a message for my friend Saddam Hussein: Cancel. Cancel the celebration. Cancel the celebration. We are going to win, and we are going to make you adhere to every single resolution passed by the United Nations


Remarks at Texas A&M University in College Station, Texas
December 15, 1992

One of vitalinterest to every young person: In the area of security and arms control, we've stepped up patrol against the spread of weapons of mass destruction. The new chemical weapons convention will ban chemical weapons from the arsenals of all participating states. We've strengthened multilateral export controls on nuclear and chemical and biological and missile-related technologies. And in a mission without precedent, a U.N. inspection team is demolishing Iraq's unconventional weapons capability, and we're going to support them every inch of the way. And once implemented, the agreements we've negotiated will ban new nuclear states on the territory of the former Soviet Union. And above all, we've sought to erase nuclear nightmares from the sleep of future generations. 
We underscored one key security principle with a line in the sand: Naked aggression against our vitalinterests will be answered decisively by American resolve, American leadership, and American might. Our victory in the Gulf, in the Persian Gulf, was more than a blow for justice; it was a reminder to other would-be aggressors that they will pay a price for their outlaw acts.


Remarks at the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York
January 5, 1993

As Commander in Chief, I have made the difficult choice to use military force. I determined we could notallow Saddam's forces to ravage Kuwait and hold this critical region at gunpoint. I thought then, and I think now, that using military force to implement the resolutions of the U.N. Security Council was in the interest of the United States and the world community. The need to use force arose as well in the wake of the Gulf war, when we came to the aid of the peoples of both northern and southern Iraq. And more recently, as I'm sure you know, I determined that only the use of force could stem this human tragedy of Somalia. 
The United States should not stand by with so many lives at stake and when a limited deployment of U.S. forces, buttressed by the forces of other countries and acting under the full authority of the United Nations, could make an immediate and dramatic difference, and do so without excessive levels of risk and cost. Operations Provide Comfort and Southern Watch in Iraq and then Operation Restore Hope in Somalia all bear witness to the wisdom of selected use of force for selective purposes
We have succeeded abroad in no small part because of our people in uniform. The men and women in our Armed Forces have demonstrated their ability to master the challenges of modern warfare. And at the same time, and whether on the battlefield of Iraq or in some tiny little village in Somalia, America's soldiers have always brought a quality of caring and kindness to their mission. Who will ever forget -- I know I won't -- those terrified Iraqi soldiers surrendering to American troops? And who will forget the way the American soldier held out his arms and said, "It's okay. You're all right now." Or in Somalia, the young marine, eyes filled with tears, holding the fragile arm of an emaciated child. There can be no doubt about it: The All Volunteer Force is one of the true success stories of modern day America



Remarks to Central Intelligence Agency Employees in Langley, Virginia
January 8, 1993

But we can't fool ourselves. Those who would challenge us, and we're seeing it right now as we try to decide what we should do over in Iraq, those who would challenge freedom's gains are many. We continue to face threats in the world of terrorism where a lot of good work has been the antiterrorist work. And the intelligence contributing to that out here has been fantastic. Many here are concerned about and have worked on weapons proliferation. And of course, I remain very much concerned about that. I had a little briefing on just a corner of the world on narcotics trafficking. And here the Agency and the community is doing a superb job on the intelligence for that. Economic security -- I salute those who are involved in the economic side of our intelligence. And all of these things must continue, and all of these accounts must be strongly serviced.


Remarks on Presenting the National Security Medal to Admiral Jonathan T. Howe and an Exchange With Reporters
January 13, 1993

Now, you wanted to ask a question on the military action. Let me simply say that once again the American military, in coalition with strong allies, has performed in a superb fashion. Our planes are all accounted for. I've not yet seen a damage assessment or results of the strike. But they did theright thing, and the coalition did theright thing. I have said before that we are determined that Saddam Hussein will abide by the United Nations resolutions, and we're very serious about that. 
I can say with confidence here, and I think it's important, that I'm confident Governor Clinton, the President-elect of the United States, feels that way too. I have talked to him before these strikes hit, and he as much as told me that, and then I've heard statements out of Little Rock. But I think that's a very important message to go not just to our coalition forces, that we have every intention of working together in the future as we have in the past, but to Saddam Hussein who has violated the resolutions. 
The President. Well, I don't know what "work" means, but I am confident that when I -- I will continue to insist that he abide by these resolutions. We've taken action, and I hope that will convince him he must do that. And I'm as confident that President Clinton will do this and feel the same way after the 20th. 
The President. Just his failure to live up to the resolutions and then his moving around of these missiles in a way that was unacceptable to the coalition of the United Nations. 
The President. I will conduct myself until the 20th just as I have in the almost 4 years gone by, and that is, I don't say what we might or might not do. But I would think that soon Saddam Hussein would understand that we mean what we say and that we back it up. And I have no intention of changing that approach to life in the last 6 or 7 days of my Presidency. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters on the Situation in Iraq
January 15, 1993

The President. I have a brief statement that I want to make before heading up to Camp David. It relates to Iraq. And I just wanted to let you know that we continue to monitor Iraq's behavior for compliance with the United Nations resolutions. 
Yesterday's mission was a success. It seriously depleted Iraq's air defense system, the one south of the 32d parallel. And nevertheless, we continue to examine the residual aspects of that mission. 
In addition, we continue to demand access by United Nations aircraft for inspections in Iraq. And the United Nations has made it clear to the Iraqis that the United Nations inspection teams are prepared to resume their work and have theright to fly U.N. aircraft into that country at any time. The flight scheduled for today did not receive clearance to enter Iraqi airspace. And the United Nations has informed Saddam Hussein that if flight clearance is not granted by 4 p.m. Eastern Standard Time today, Iraq will be in noncompliance. And the coalition partners are firm in demanding compliance with United Nations resolutions. 
The President. Helen [Helen Thomas, United Press International], you've been covering things around here ever since I've been President, and I'll never say what we do do or don't do in terms of compelling compliance. 
The President. I think sufficient warnings have been granted. And they know what they must do. And this is not just the United States. This is the United Nations. It's a strong coalition whose determination has not diminished in any single way


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada at Camp David, Maryland
January 16, 1993

The President. We have no response now. We're interested in knowing what the United Nations response is. It's the United Nations going on with this; it's the United Nations, Dr. Ekeus, that we'll be talking to. And we'll all be talking about that a little later. But his move just was announced, and we'll just have to wait and see how it's regarded. We don't do these things unilaterally. We consult. We'll be able to talk now with the Prime Minister. We'll be talking with others as well, I think, during the course of this afternoon

The President. We're not on the brink or moved back from anything. We're just going to be consulting, and we'll see where we go from there. I wasn't trying to be belligerent. I'm just simply saying they're going to comply with these resolutions, period. And so we'll see. 
The President. Well, we're going to talk about it. I mean, I've learned something about this. You don't jump to conclusions until you know all the facts, get all the translation. I heard him. What I heard in English sounded -- that he was going to let these people in, but we've got to wait and see. I don't know about these conditions and all of that. But those are the things you consult about. He's thrown some conditions on it

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister John Major of the United Kingdom
February 24, 1993

(First statement by Clinton)

The President. We talked mostly about the importance of adhering to the United Nations resolutions as they apply to Iraq and the aftermath of the Gulf war and about our general support for the peace process continuing. We didn't deal with that issue, and I think I ought to wait until the Secretary of State returns from his mission before I discuss it further.



The President's News Conference With President Francois Mitterrand of France
March 9, 1993

Our two nations share a friendship which dates back to the revolutionary birth of both countries, rooted in common values of equality, liberty, and democracy. These bonds of culture, of history, and of common purpose have made possible a remarkable amount of cooperation in recent days in meeting the challenges in Iraq and Somalia and Bosnia.


Interview With Dan Rather of CBS News
March 24, 1993

The President. I think the inference was wrong. What I said was, I cannot conceive of the United States ever having any kind of normal relationship with Iraq as long as Saddam Hussein is there. I can't conceive it. What I said was that I did not wish to demonize him; I want to judge him based on his conduct. And in that context, I will be very firm, and the United States will remain very tough on the proposition that he must fully comply with the United Nations requirements, which he has still not done, in order for us to favor any kind of relaxation of the restrictions now on him through the U.N. That's my position


Remarks to the American Society of Newspaper Editors in Annapolis
April 1, 1993

From the first hours of my administration, several critical situations have demanded our attention, in Iraq, in Somalia, in Haiti, in the Middle East, in the former Yugoslavia, and elsewhere. We have sought to develop strategies to address these and other immediate challenges. And I'm encouraged by the progress which has been made in most of the areas of challenge.

Now reflect on what has happened just since Russia joined us in a search for peaceful solutions. We cooperated in the United Nations to defeat Iraqi aggression in Kuwait. We cosponsored promising peace talks in the Mideast. We worked together to foster reconciliation in Cambodia and El Salvador. We joined forces to protect the global environment. Progress of this kind strengthens our security and that of other nations. If we can help Russia to remain increasingly democratic, we can leave an era of standoff behind us and explore expanding horizons of progress and peace


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt
April 6, 1993

President Clinton. Oh, that was like the Iraqi charm offensive. He's just trying to head off tougher sanctions if the Vance-Owen plan is not embraced


The President's News Conference With President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt
April 6, 1993

We discussed the need to ensure stability in the Gulf. We're determined that the hard-won achievements of Desert Storm will be protected and that Iraq will comply fully with all relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions. We're also determined to counter Iran's involvement in terrorism and its active opposition to the Middle East peace process


Remarks at the Dedication of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum
April 22, 1993

Ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia is but the most brutal and blatant and ever-present manifestation of what we see also with the oppression of the Kurds in Iraq, the abusive treatment of the Baha'i in Iran, the endless race-based violence in South Africa. And in many other places we are reminded again and again how fragile are the safeguards of civilization. So do the depraved and insensate bands now loose in the modern world. Look at the liars and the propagandists among us, the skinheads and the Liberty Lobby here at home, the Afrikaaners resistance movement in South Africa, the Radical Party of Serbia, the Russian blackshirts. With them we must all compete for the interpretation and the preservation of history, of what we know and how we should behave.


Remarks at the United States Military Academy Commencement Ceremony in West Point, New York
May 29, 1993

You have stepped forward not only to serve but to lead. For the hallmark of West Point has been its tradition of growing leaders of character. Whenever the Nation called, members of the Long Gray Line have led the way. Your predecessors led tight-lipped troops into the smoke and flame of battle at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg. They were first out of the muddy trenches into the attack at the Meuse-Argonne. They led the first wave of assaults from Normandy. They held the line at Pusan and were first off the helicopters in the Ia Drang Valley and the Iron Triangle. More recent graduates were among those who jumped into Panama and led the charge into Iraq. And the corps was there as well when the call came from the victims of hunger, when the call came from the victims of Hurricane Andrew. From Florida to Somalia, you have been there.

As we discovered in Iraq, surging stocks of ballistic missiles and other advanced arms have enabled outlaw nations to extend the threat of mass destruction a long way beyond their own borders. And meeting these new threats will require a new approach and a new determination shared by all peace-loving nations to oppose the spread of these dread weapons. In the coming months, our administration will address the dangers from growing stockpiles of nuclear materials that could be used in these weapons and the risk of nuclear smuggling and terrorism


The President's News Conference
June 17, 1993
The President. I have not received the final report from the FBI, and until I do I don't think I should say what I will or won't do.



Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With King Hussein of Jordan
June 18, 1993

The President. Talked a lot about the peace process. I learned about the King's position; he learned about the United States position. We talked a little about Iraq and the imperative nature of continuing to enforce those sanctions and being very tough on them. We talked about his efforts to democratize the country and to modernize the economy and deal with all the things he's dealt with over the last 40 years and especially the last 3. It was a very, very good meeting.


Remarks on the Appointment of Kristine M. Gebbie as AIDS Policy Coordinator and an Exchange With Reporters
June 25, 1993

The President. It's quite serious. And the United Nations—you've already heard the U.N. speak to it, and I would expect that the matter will have to be resolved one way or the other in the fairly near future. I do think that—I don't have much to add to the pronouncements that have come out of the U.N. The United States has to continue to support compliance with the U.N. resolutions as they apply to Iraq.



Address to the Nation on the Strike on Iraqi Intelligence Headquarters
June 26, 1993

My fellow Americans, this evening I want to speak with you about an attack by the Government of Iraq against the United States and the actions we have just taken to respond. 
This past April, the Kuwaiti Government uncovered what they suspected was a car bombing plot to assassinate former President George Bush while he was visiting Kuwait City. The Kuwaiti authorities arrested 16 suspects, including 2 Iraqi nationals. Following those arrests, I ordered our own intelligence and law enforcement agencies to conduct a thorough and independent investigation. Over the past several weeks, officials from those agencies reviewed a range of intelligence information, traveled to Kuwait and elsewhere, extensively interviewed the suspects, and thoroughly examined the forensic evidence. 
This Thursday, Attorney General Reno and Director of Central Intelligence Woolsey gave me their findings. Based on their investigation there is compelling evidence that there was, in fact, a plot to assassinate former President Bush and that this plot, which included the use of a powerful bomb made in Iraq, was directed and pursued by the Iraqi intelligence service. 
We should not be surprised by such deeds, coming as they do from a regime like Saddam Hussein's, which is ruled by atrocity, slaughtered its own people, invaded two neighbors, attacked others, and engaged in chemical and environmental warfare. Saddam has repeatedly violated the will and conscience of the international community. But this attempt at revenge by a tyrant against the leader of the world coalition that defeated him in war is particularly loathsome and cowardly. We thank God it was unsuccessful. The authorities who foiled it have the appreciation of all Americans. 
It is clear that this was no impulsive or random act. It was an elaborate plan devised by the Iraqi Government and directed against a former President of the United States because of actions he took as President. As such, the Iraqi attack against President Bush was an attack against our country and against all Americans. We could not and have not let such action against our Nation go unanswered. 
From the first days of our Revolution, America's security has depended on the clarity of this message: Don't tread on us. A firm and commensurate response was essential to protect our sovereignty, to send a message to those who engage in state-sponsored terrorism, to deter further violence against our people, and to affirm the expectation of civilized behavior among nations. 
Therefore, on Friday I ordered our forces to launch a cruise missile attack on the Iraqi intelligence service's principal command-and-control facility in Baghdad. Those missiles were launched this afternoon at 4:22 eastern daylight time. They landed approximately an hour ago. I have discussed this action with the congressional leadership and with our allies and friends in the region. And I have called for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council to expose Iraq's crime. 
These actions were directed against the Iraqi Government, which was responsible for the assassination plot. Saddam Hussein has demonstrated repeatedly that he will resort to terrorism or aggression if left unchecked. Our intent was to target Iraq's capacity to support violence against the United States and other nations and to deter Saddam Hussein from supporting such outlaw behavior in the future. Therefore, we directed our action against the facility associated with Iraq's support of terrorism, while making every effort to minimize the loss of innocent life. 
There should be no mistake about the message we intend these actions to convey to Saddam Hussein, to the rest of the Iraqi leadership, and to any nation, group, or person who would harm our leaders or our citizens. We will combat terrorism. We will deter aggression. We will protect our people. 
The world has repeatedly made clear what Iraq must do to return to the community of nations. And Iraq has repeatedly refused. If Saddam and his regime contemplate further illegal provocative actions, they can be certain of our response.


Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters Prior to a Cabinet Meeting
June 28, 1993

The President. First, I want to say that this morning I received a report from the National Security Adviser about the action in Iraq over the weekend, confirming that we did in fact cripple the Iraqi intelligence capacity, which was the intent of the action. Our allies have been quite positive in their response. And I want to say a special word of compliment to Ambassador Albright for the work she did at the United Nations yesterday. I thought it was an excellent job. 
I think it's very important today at this Cabinet meeting that we move on to other matters, that we 
The President. Well, the action I took I thought was clearly warranted by the facts. And I think other terrorists around the world need to know that the United States will do what we can to combat terrorism, as I said in my statement on Saturday evening. It is plainly what we ought to be doing. 


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina
June 29, 1993

The President. Well, we'll deal with those as they arise. 



The President's News Conference With President Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina
June 29, 1993

President Clinton. We believe the evidence clearly indicates that the bombing operation was authorized by the Iraqi Government. And it is highly unusual, in the experience of our people-let me recast that—our analysts have no experience of such an operation of that magnitude being authorized other than at the highest levels. However, it was thought that under international law and based on the facts of this particular case, that the best possible target was the target of the intelligence headquarters where in all probability the operation itself was planned and that to damage that headquarters significantly would send the appropriate message, given the facts of this case. 
President Clinton. I have given you the only answer I think it's appropriate for me to give you. 
President Clinton. First of all, we damaged their major intelligence facility quite severely. Secondly, we made it absolutely clear that we will not tolerate acts of terrorism or other illegal and dangerous acts. I think it sent a very important message. 
President Clinton. The standard rules of engagement for flights in that region are that if radar locks onto our airplanes, our airplanes are authorized to takeaction against those installations. So this has happened a number of times, and based on the facts that I now have, I wouldn't read too much into it. It's part of the standard rules of engagement. 
President Clinton. What I said or at least tried to say in the transition was that I thought we ought to judge every country based on its conduct. And based on its conduct, I think that the possibility of normal relations is very difficult to conceive, not just in this instance but also in the stubborn refusal of Iraq to comply with the United Nations resolutions. 
President Clinton. I think it did cripple the intelligence facility. At least the reports that I received from the intelligence services was that 15 of the missiles had hit within just a few feet of where they were exactly programmed, and based on what they knew of the potential for destruction of those missiles, that the facility had been crippled. Those were the exact words I got from the people who briefed me about it. 
President Clinton. Well, I didn't mean that they wouldn't have any more intelligence. But I do think the building and whatever resources are in that building, which is plainly the main building, was severely damaged, and that's what our intelligence people told me. 
President Clinton. Well, we try to always provide appropriate security to world leaders who come here. President Menem—perhaps I should let him speak to this—but he was very supportive of the action we took in Iraq and very determined that we ought to stand together with other civilized nations against terrorism everywhere. 
President Clinton. No, I disagree. As a matter of fact, the United States has been a leader in disarmament. We have signed significant agreements with first the Soviet Union and now with Russia trying to reduce our nuclear arsenals. We are working very hard to reduce the spread of weapons of mass destruction. And I think what we did last weekend with regard to Iraq is a clear signal that people ought not to use weapons in illegal ways. I would remind you that the action I took was in response to an operation that involved a bomb that, had it exploded in downtown Kuwait City, had a 400-yard radius of lethal destruction. So, I think it was the appropriate thing to do
President Clinton. I think we've made it clear to them what our position is on the second question you asked. The reason we went at night was quite simply that we wanted to make a strong point. We wanted to do as much damage to the facility as we could. We wanted to minimize the loss of human life because of the nature of what actually happened. I think everyone knows what our military is capable of doing. What we needed to show them was that we were fully possessed of the will to do it under these circumstances. And I think we picked the appropriate target, and I think we did it at the appropriate time under these circumstances



Remarks at a Meeting With Doug Luffborough and an Exchange With Reporters
July 1, 1993

The President. I don't know. I need to be briefed on what he said. But of course, they shouldn't act in revenge. We have evidence that what was done was wrong, and the United States had to respond.


Interview With Foreign Journalists
July 2, 1993
The President. Well, I disagree with that. The difference is this: that in Iraq we had clear evidence that the government planned a terrorist attack and an assassination of a former President of the United States for actions he took as President. We clearly had theright to takeaction under international law, clearly. 
Secondly, if you forget about that action and you look at other actions against Iraq, they were taken within the framework of the United Nations and United Nations resolutions. The United Nations operates against, if you will—the governing resolution of the United Nations is against the policy that I have advocated in Bosnia. Therefore, it would take a change in the United Nations posture to effect that policy. The United States cannot go out and violate international law or go out on its own. That is not—we have never been for that.

And let's not be confused about that. Somalia, Iraq, Bosnia, these things are very important. That was the central challenge that will affect our interests. And we did respond, not just the United States, all of us did. And we did theright thing and so far it's had theright consequence. 
With regard to Iraq, the action I took in Iraq was specifically designed to respond to the attempt to assassinate President Bush. It was theright thing to do, I think. There are a whole set of other issues which have to do with Iraq's defiance of the U.N. resolutions. The Security Council issued a very stern warning to Iraq, and I think there will either be more compliance or some sort of appropriate action. 
But again, I would say to you if you look at Iraq and you say we didn't solve that, it seems to me that the west did theright thing in not being obsessed with deposing Saddam Hussein. We acted against him because he invaded Kuwait. So he was removed from Kuwait and has been confined in a lot of the mischief he might have otherwise have wreaked. So I don't know if you can tout that as a failure


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at Waseda University in Tokyo
July 7, 1993

The President. You mean the attack that I ordered on Iraq? 

The President. First, let me talk about Iraq, and then I will discuss the other issues. There was no discrimination involved. Our intelligence and law enforcement agencies conducted an investigation on the people who were arrested in Kuwait and charged with bringing in a very dangerous bomb for the purpose of assassinating former President Bush because of actions he took as President in the Gulf war. I was advised that they believe that that in fact occurred, that a plan devised by the Iraqi Government was attempted to be carried out in Kuwait to kill former President Bush with a bomb that had a lethal radius of about 400 yards. That is, it could have killed people within 400 yards around where it exploded. So I took what I thought was appropriate and perfectly legal retaliatory action, basically as a deterrent to further behavior of that kind. It had nothing to do with any racial or religious distinction. And indeed, Iraq's closest neighbors, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, applauded the action that was taken. 
There was no racial or religious or ethnic discrimination involved in the Iraqi action. It was, I believe, clearly theright thing to do. But we are reaching out to Muslim peoples all across the world with our friendship with Turkey, our friendship with many of the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union, and elsewhere, people who share our values. We respect their religious and their cultural traditions. We want stronger ties. And I very much hope that the multiethnic government in Bosnia can survive.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Kim Campbell of Canada in Tokyo
July 9, 1993

The President. Let me answer—if I might answer that question. The Prime Minister mentioned wheat, sugar, lumber, and beer. We talked about those issues. She also brought to my attention, frankly, something that I have to admit I think she's absolutely fight on, that Canada should have been notified at the time we took the action in Iraq. Let me tell you, there was a very tight time window there because of the coincidence of the time when I received the final report from my intelligence and investigative agencies and when the trial started again and getting past the Sabbath in the Islamic countries, the day of worship. That's something that we should have done then and that we will do in the future. Canada has been a good strategic ally of the United States. It's absolutely pivotal in any number of ways. And it was a very legitimate issue to raise


The President's News Conference in Tokyo
July 9, 1993

The President. First of all, I think it is serious. And secondly, the response should be a multilateral one. The action we took in response to the plot to assassinate President Bush was a unilateral one, and it should have been, clearly provided for under international law. This action is a violation of the United Nations resolutions, and we are going to keep pushing on it. Hopefully, the Iraqis will relent. If they don't, then we'll go back to the U.N, to the Security Council, and decide where to go from there.


Remarks to the Troops at Camp Casey, South Korea
July 11, 1993

Just a few weeks ago I ordered an attack on Baghdad, and you know why: because we concluded that Iraq had staged a plot to assassinate former President Bush while he was in Kuwait. And they were under the illusion that we treat our political leaders like they treat theirs. This is America. We honor everybody who has served this country, and we stick together. But when I gave that order, I did it with the confidence that we had the best military in the world, equipped with the finest technology in history. And after that action was over, I felt more strongly than ever before that we must continue to have the best military in the world and the finest technology in the world.


Remarks Announcing the New Policy on Homosexuals in the Military
July 19, 1993

Let me start with this clear fact: Our military is one of our greatest accomplishments and our most valuable assets. It is the world's most effective and powerful fighting force, bar none. I have seen proof of this fact almost every day since I became President. I saw it last week when I visited Camp Casey, along the DMZ in Korea. I witnessed it at our military academies at Annapolis and West Point when I visited there. And I certainly relied on it 3 weeks ago when I ordered an attack on Iraq after that country's leadership attempted to assassinate President Bush.


Interview With Larry King
July 20, 1993
I'm glad you brought it up. I think it's a very significant problem. I hope you will press this hard in Paris as you are pressing Washington, because that is something that all the West should be sensitive to. We must notallow Iraq, Iran, and other agents of terrorism and assassination to dominate the world politically and to terrorize innocent people. I think you're absolutely right



Interview With the Alabama Media
July 21, 1993

The fundamental problem is that we are going in rather rapid succession from a military with about 2.5 million people in 1987 to one with somewhere between 1.6 million and 1.4 million people at the end of this decade. Now, as we do that, we were looking at projected downsizing of the military force by 40 percent, with a base structure downsized by only 9. If you do that, that means you're going to have a lot of base structure and capacity you can't use. And what will happen is you will have to cut contracts for these weapons that are so important to us. For example, in the attack on Iraq where we sent the cruise missiles in, it's very important that we continue to modernize those things, make them more accurate, continue to develop weaponry. You have to cut more of that if you don't cut bases and structure appropriately. So, in general, I had to approve that.


Remarks on the Earned-Income Tax Credit and an Exchange With Reporters
July 29, 1993

The President. There is nothing out of the ordinary about what happened. It was not part of any new initiative. It was part of the old understandings under which our planes operate in that area and circumstances under which they respond.


Remarks Announcing the Nomination of General John Shalikashvili To Be Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
August 11, 1993

General Shali entered the United States Army as a draftee and rose through the ranks to his current position of Supreme Allied Commander in Europe and the commander in chief of all United States forces there. He's demonstrated his outstanding military talents repeatedly throughout a distinguished career from the day he was first drafted into the Army. He's a decorated Vietnam veteran. He ran Operation Provide Comfort in Iraq. He served on the Joint Chiefs of Staff as General Powell's assistant. He has the deep respect of both the troops who have served under him and the military leaders who have worked with him.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tansu Ciller of Turkey
October 15, 1993

Since the time 40 years ago when we stood side by side in Korea, Turkey has served the cause of freedom as NATO's southern anchor and has been a valued ally of the United States. Turkey was a steadfast member of the worldwide coalition that drove Saddam Hussein from Kuwait and instituted international sanctions against Iraq. And for that, the United States remains very grateful. We've all had to pay a price for enforcing the will of the international community, and Turkey in that regard has certainly done more than its share. And we are grateful for its contribution. 
We discussed Turkey's role in helping to play a stabilizing role in a host of regional trouble spots, ranging from the former Yugoslavia, through the Caucasus, into Central Asia and, of course, toward the Southeast where Iraq and Iran both continue to pose problems for peace and stability in the world
The President. Well, the Prime Minister and I discussed that today because—and I guess I should say for the benefit of the American press something the press knows, but the American people should be reminded of—we could not have conducted the successful operation in the Gulf war, and we certainly could not have conducted Operation Provide Comfort to save the Kurds in northern Iraq, had it not been for the indispensable support of Turkey and the support of Turkey not only for Operation Provide Comfort but for the embargo on Iraq. They have paid a significant economic price.




