MID 451201, Iran, 20 Feb 2003 – 1 Jan 2004


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 28, 2003
Different threats require different strategies. In Iran, we continue to see a Government that represses its people, pursues weapons of mass destruction, and supports terror. We also see Iranian citizens risking intimidation and death as they speak out for liberty and human rights and democracy. Iranians, like all people, have a right to choose their own Government and determine their own destiny, and the United States supports their aspirations to live in freedom.


Interview With Tom Brokaw of NBC News
April 24, 2003
The President. Well, you know, you hear a lot of reports about the vacuums being filled by Iranian agents. We certainly hope that Iraq—Iran will allow Iraq to develop into a stable and peaceful society. We have sent the word to the Iranians that that's what we expect. I talk to Tony Blair and Jose Maria Aznar on a regular basis—talked to them yesterday—and this subject came up. And both of them have got contacts with the Iranian Government, and they will send the same message, similar to what we did to Syria, that we expect there to be cooperation and—— 
The President. No, we just expect them to cooperate, and we will work with the world to encourage them to cooperate. We have no military plans. Just like I said about Syria. I mean, listen, the world, a lot of the—frankly, the left wing critics of our policy have said, "You know, these people are so militaristic, they're getting ready to invade Syria." That was the line of the day. We made it clear to the Syrians we expect them to cooperate. 
Remarks Prior to Discussions With Amir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani of Qatar and an Exchange With Reporters
May 8, 2003
President Bush. Well, I've always expressed my concerns, that of the Iranians may be developing a nuclear program. I have done so publicly. I have done so privately. As you may recall, I expressed those concerns to Vladimir Putin when I went to Russia. And as I understand, the IAEA is coming out with a report in June, and we'll wait and see what it says. 
But one of the things we must do is work together to stop the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. It is a major issue that faces the world, and it's an issue in which the United States will still lead. 
Commencement Address at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, South Carolina
May 9, 2003
And in Iran, the desire for freedom is stirring. In the face of harsh repression, Iranians are courageously speaking out for democracy and the rule of law and human rights. And the United States strongly supports their aspirations for freedom.
Remarks on the Tornado Damage and an Exchange With Reporters in Pierce City
May 13, 2003
Oh, I have no idea. Look, it's way too early. Let me get back to Washington and get the facts, and we'll work on it.
Interview With RTR TV of Russia
May 29, 2003
We've had all kinds of reports that we're going to use force in Syria. And now some on the left, I guess, are saying force in Iran or force here and force there. You know, it's pure speculation. And we used force in Iraq after a long, long period of diplomacy. Remember, I was a person that went to the United Nations on September the 12th in 2002 and said, "Let's work together." And we got a resolution out of the United Nations.
Interview With TV3 of France
May 29, 2003
The President. No, I don't fear that. I think the Iraqi people want to run their own state. They don't need to have an Iranian-backed regime. I think the Iraqi people are plenty capable of managing their own affairs.
Well, we are concerned— we are concerned that there's Al Qaida inside of Iran and have made our concerns very clearly. And this will give me a chance to do so again. To the extent that they have got Al Qaida in their country, we expect them to detain them and eventually hand them over to their countries of origin. There's no preoccupation. Our main focus right now is to find Al Qaida wherever they exist and bring them to justice, and we will do that. We'll continue to do that, and we expect others to join us.
Interview With Al Arabiyya of the United Arab Emirates
May 29, 2003
In Iran, obviously, we're nervous about the reporting now out that there's some Al Qaida inside of Iran. We just want the Iranians to understand that if there are Al Qaida loose in Iran, we expect them to be detained. If there are Al Qaida in Iran and they plot against the United States, that obviously we're going to be displeased with that. 
My hope, of course, is that the Iranians respond. And they've heard our message loud and clear, and I suspect they will. 
The President's News Conference With President Vladimir Putin of Russia in St. Petersburg, Russia
June 1, 2003
The United States and Russia are also determined to meet the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. We strongly urge North Korea to visibly, verifiably, and irreversibly dismantle its nuclear weapons program. We are concerned about Iran's advanced nuclear program and urge Iran to comply in full with its obligations under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. President Putin and I intend to strengthen our own cooperation on missile defense, which is essential to the security of both our nations.
Russia and the United States have mutual concerns about the advanced Iranian nuclear program. We understand the consequences of Iran having a nuclear weapon. And therefore, we want to work together as well as with the IAEA to insist that they not have a nuclear weapon. And I appreciate Vladimir Putin's understanding of the issue and his willingness to work with me and others to solve this potential problem.
Exchange With Reporters in Kennebunkport, Maine
June 15, 2003
I think that freedom is a powerful incentive. And I am—I believe that someday freedom will prevail everywhere, because freedom is a powerful drive for people to—and it's the beginnings of people expressing themselves toward a free Iran, which I think is positive.
Remarks Prior to a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
June 18, 2003
Well, the international community must come together to make it very clear to Iran that we will not tolerate the construction of a nuclear weapon. Iran would be dangerous if they have a nuclear weapon. I brought this subject up in the G-8; we had a good discussion on the subject with near universal agreement that we all must work together to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. 
And secondly, I appreciate those courageous souls who speak out for freedom in Iran. They need to know America stands squarely by their side. And I would urge the Iranian administration to treat them with the utmost of respect. 
The President's News Conference With European Union Leaders
June 25, 2003
The United States and the EU are working closely to meet the proliferation challenges posed by North Korea and Iran. The recent report by the International Atomic Energy Agency clearly describes Iran's failure to meet its obligations to the world and to provide access for agency officials. 
America and the EU agree that Iran must cooperate fully with the IAEA. We agree that Iran must sign and comply with an additional protocol giving the IAEA new tools to investigate clandestine nuclear weapons activities. Iran has pledged not to develop nuclear weapons, and the entire international community must hold that regime to its commitments. 
Iran must comply. It's— the free world expects Iran to comply. Just leave it at that. They can—— 
President Bush. We expect them to. See, you're assuming they won't. We believe they will when the free world comes together. 
President Bush. And if they don't, we'll deal with that when they don't. 
Remarks Announcing the Nomination of Randall Tobias To Be Global AIDS Coordinator and an Exchange With Reporters
July 2, 2003
The President. No, we did not discuss the situation in Liberia. We did discuss the situation in Iran. I thanked him for keeping the pressure on the Iranian Government to dismantle any notions they might have of building a nuclear weapon. 
And we're making progress on that front. Not only does Vladimir Putin understand our concerns and shares the concerns; the EU, for example, has sent out a very strong statement to the Iranians that the world expects them to conform with the IAEA, to cooperate with the IAEA, and to get rid of any plans to develop a nuclear weapon. 
We're making progress on both fronts, and it's helpful to be able to cooperate with Russia in dealing with matters of international security. 
The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy in Crawford, Texas

