MID 439701, Somalia, 1 Feb 2008 – 2 Mar 2008
Searched for “somali”

Interview With Foreign Radio Journalists
February 14, 2008
Yes, we're concerned about instability anywhere, really, but instability is what--and confusion and chaos and fear is the conditions under which a group like Al Qaida can thrive. That's why they like to kill people, innocent people, to create doubt about existing security, to create fear among the population. So any time you see that kind of instability, we're deeply concerned about it. 
Secondly, there have been Al Qaida--some Al Qaida operating out of Somalia, and therefore, when you know some Al Qaida have been in and out of Somalia and there is some chaos and confusion, the conclusion is, we better be worried about it and do something about it. And we are. We've got cooperative arrangements in the region that will make it more likely for us to be able to provide protections for the people in the region and ourself.	
But the Horn is an area of deep concern for the U.S. We actually happen to have a base there as well, in Djibouti. And we take the issues there seriously and are very engaged with it on a regular basis.

The President's News Conference With President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete of Tanzania in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
February 17, 2008
And so step one, you can be assured that we're interested in the affairs of Africa. All you have to do is look at the--at what we've done in this administration.
And so our position--and by the way, when it comes to AU efforts in areas where it requires--which requires peacekeepers, we've been very strong about helping to train and transport or arrange transportation for peacekeepers into troubled areas. And so our record speaks for itself, and it--the way we've conducted our foreign policy with Africa is, one, it's been a priority, and two, as I say, we come to the continent not out of guilt but out of compassion. And we come to the continent with confidence that there are leaders here who are very capable of charting the way forward to peaceful resolution of conflicts.

