MID 448601, China

The President's News Conference
January 12, 2009
You go to Africa, you ask Africans about Americans' generosity and compassion; go to India, and ask about, you know, America's--their view of America; go to China and ask. Now, if--no question, parts of Europe have said that we shouldn't have gone to war in Iraq without a mandate, but those are a few countries. Most countries in Europe listened to what 1441 said, which is disclose, disarm, or face serious consequences.

Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the Department of State
January 15, 2009
In Asia, we deepened our alliances with old friends, Japan and South Korea, and we strengthened ties with China. I'm not so sure if this is historically accurate, but we may be the only administration that has had really good ties with Japan, South Korea, and China all at the same time.

Remarks on Energy
January 26, 2009
Finally, we will make it clear to the world that America is ready to lead. To protect our climate and our collective security, we must call together a truly global coalition. I've made it clear that we will act, but so too must the world. That's how we will deny leverage to dictators and dollars to terrorists. And that's how we will ensure that nations like China and India are doing their part, just as we are now willing to do ours.

Remarks on Economic Stabilization and a Question-and-Answer Session in Fort Myers, Florida
February 10, 2009
This is the same example of turning crisis into opportunity. This should be a wake-up callfor us. You go to Shanghai, China right now, and they've got high-speed rail that puts our railroads to shame. They've got ports that are state of the art. Their airports are--compared to the airports that we--you go through Beijing Airport, and you compare that to Miami Airport? Now, look, the--this is America.

Interview with Columnists of the Washington Post
February 13, 2009
Keep in mind, though, that even in that scenario, Japan had an awful lot of foreign currency reserves, they had a surplus from a positive trade balance. And the United States was pulling a world economy along. In this situation you've got all the economies around the world, even including China, decelerating at a fairly rapid rate. So if what happened in Japan is duplicated here in the United States, there's nobody else to help drive the engine of growth, you could end up seeing an even more protracted and prolonged worldwide contraction. And I think that would have a severe impact on our quality of life.

Interview With Peter Mansbridge of Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
February 17, 2009
The President. Well, it--what we know is that oil sands create a big--creates a big carbon footprint. And so the dilemma that Canada faces, the United States faces, and China and the entire world faces is how do we obtain the energy that we need to grow our economies in a way that is not rapidly accelerating climate change. And that's one of the reasons why the stimulus bill that I'll be signing today contains billions of dollars towards clean energy development. 
I think to the extent that Canada and the United States can collaborate on ways that we can sequester carbon, capture greenhouse gases before they're emitted into the atmosphere, that's going to be good for everybody. Because if we don't, then we're going to have a ceiling at some point in terms of our ability to expand our economies and maintain the standard of living that's so important, particularly when you've got countries like China and India that are obviously interested in catching up. 
The President. Well, I think what I'm suggesting is, is that no country in isolation is going to be able to solve this problem. So Canada, the United States, China, India, the European Union, all of us are going to have to work together in an effective way to figure out how do we balance the imperatives of economic growth with very real concerns about the effect we're having on our planet. And ultimately, I think this can be solved by technology. 
What I think that offers is the possibility of a template that we can create between Canada, the United States, and Mexico that is moving forcefully around these issues. But as I said, it's going to be important for us to make sure that countries like China and India, with enormous populations and huge energy needs, that they are brought into this process as well.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada in Ottawa, Canada
February 19, 2009
I think the more that we can coordinate in--with Canada, as well as Mexico, a country that has already shown interest in leadership on this issue--and when I spoke to President Calderon, he indicated this is an area of interest to him--the more that, within this hemisphere, we can show leadership, I think the more likely it is that we can draw in countries like China and India, whose participation is absolutely critical for us to be able to solve this problem over the long term.

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress
February 24, 2009
It begins with energy. We know the country that harnesses the power of clean, renewable energy will lead the 21st century. And yet, it is China that has launched the largest effort in history to make their economy energy efficient. We invented solar technology, but we've fallen behind countries like Germany and Japan in producing it. New plug-in hybrids roll off our assembly lines, but they will run on batteries made in Korea. Well, I do notaccept a future where the jobs and industries of tomorrow take root beyond our borders, and I know you don't either. Itistime for America to lead again.

Remarks on the Nomination of Gary F. Locke To Be Secretary of Commerce
February 25, 2009
Sometimes the American story can be told in the span of a single mile. More than 100 years ago, Gary's grandfather left China on a steamship bound for America. He had no family here. He spoke no English. He found work as a servant and purpose in a dream. He raised a son, Gary's father, who would go on to fight in World War II, return home and open a grocery store, and later raise a family of his own.

Interview With Regional Reporters
March 11, 2009
But think about it. I mean, we've laid a transcontinental railway system during the Civil War. Railroads were always the pride of America and stitched us together. Now Japan, China, all of Europe have high-speed rail systems that put ours to shame. And the potential economic benefits of a high-speed rail link between Chicago and Milwaukee, so that people are avoiding I-94, or the length between Chicago and St. Louis, Detroit, all those Midwestern cities, I think is enormous, and is a very real option with--although gas prices are low right now, it becomes a very meaningful option for people who don't want to take off their shoes, drive to an airport, pay for parking, suffer delays. So I think there's a very real opportunity

Remarks and a Discussion With the Business Roundtable
March 12, 2009
We all know that the country that harnesses the power of renewable energy will lead the 21st century. And yet, it's China that's launched the largest effort in history to make their economy energy efficient. We invented solar technology, but we've fallen behind countries like Germany and Japan in producing it. New plug-in hybrids will roll off our assembly lines, but they're running on battery cells made in Korea.
The President. Well, I actually think that it's very feasible. We're actively pursuing it. And I'm having meetings and conversations ahead of the G-20. I already had a meeting with Gordon Brown. I'll be meeting with people like Kevin Rudd from Australia. I met with the Chinese Foreign Minister today in preparations for meeting with President Hu in London, when we get--when we arrive.
I think there are a couple of broad principles that we'd like to see emerging out of the G-20; number one, that the stimulus efforts of all countries are sufficiently robust to deal with the decline in demand. We think that's important. And countries like China, for example, are doing that, and we want to make sure that everybody is mindful that the decline in global demand is enormous and now is the time for us to provide some ballast.

Remarks Following a Meeting With President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil and an Exchange With Reporters
March 14, 2009
And so I think that not just the Chinese Government, but every investor, can have absolute confidence in the soundness of investments in the United States. And that is not just in U.S.-issued Treasury notes, but also in the private sector and the commerce and the industry that has made this the most dynamic economy in the world.
Look, this is not a either/or question; this is a both/and question. We do believe that it is important for all countries around the world to step in and figure out how we can ensure that we are compensating for the drastic contraction in global demand. We're not unique in that position. Gordon Brown feels the same way, as does President Hu in China. Kevin Rudd has taken similar steps in Australia. And the Europeans have taken some steps with respect to stimulus and increasing global demand

Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and Question-and-Answer Session in Costa Mesa
March 18, 2009
Now, it can't just be a single high-stakes standardized test, but we do need to have strong, powerful measures of performance, because schools are like anything else. We can't afford our kids to be mediocre at a time when they're competing against kids in China and kids in India who are actually in school about a month longer than our kids. So there's a whole bunch of reforms that we're going to have to do.

Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and a Question-and-Answer Session in Los Angeles, California
March 19, 2009
And the truth of the matter is, even as overcrowded as schools may be, as poor the computer equipment may be, if you took a bunch of kids right now from China or India and you put them in these classrooms, from their perspective these would be unbelievable schools. I mean, they don't have better facilities, but they're out-performing us in math and science. Why is that? Well, part of it is, is that we as parents are not insisting and demanding on the kind of higher performance from our kids. So everybody has got to be more accountable in order to improve our education system.
