MID 427301, US v. Iraq



Remarks on International Efforts To Eliminate Landmines and an Exchange With Reporters
September 17, 1997

Now, we were not able to gain sufficient support for these two requests. The final treaty failed to include a transition period during which we could safely phase out our antipersonnel landmines, including in Korea. And the treaty would have banned the antitank mines our troops rely on from the outskirts of Seoul to the desert border of Iraq and Kuwait, and this in spite of the fact that other nations' antitank systems are explicitly permitted under the treaty


Remarks to the 52d Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 22, 1997

The spread of these global criminal syndicates also has made all the more urgent our common quest to eliminate weapons of mass destruction. We cannotallow them to fall or to remain in the wrong hands. Here, too, the United Nations must lead, and it has, from UNSCOM in Iraq to the International Atomic Energy Agency, now the most expansive global system ever devised to police arms control agreements


Remarks on the Retirement of General John M. Shalikashvili in Arlington, Virginia
September 30, 1997

And if the baseline measure of a Chairman's competence is successful military operations, Shali has filled a re´sume´ that would turn others olive drab with envy. In the last 4 years, our troops have been tested in more than 40 operations. From Bosnia to Haiti, the Taiwan Straits, Iraq, Rwanda, Liberia, and more, our Armed Forces have performed superbly with Shali at the helm. Our troops trust him because they know how much he cares for them. They have seen that caring in his constant contact with our service men and women, in the way he warms their hearts with his pride in them, in the humility, the honesty, the graciousness, the respect he always shows to others, in the wonderful way he listens, even to bearers of bad news


Remarks to the Asia Society and the United States-China Education Foundation Board
October 24, 1997

China is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. Its support was crucial for peacekeeping efforts in Cambodia and building international mandates to reverse Iraq's aggression against Kuwait and restore democracy to Haiti. As a neighbor of India and Pakistan, China will influence whether these great democracies move toward responsible cooperation both with each other and with China


Remarks on Senate Action on Fast-Track Trade Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
November 4, 1997

The President. Saddam Hussein should comply with the United Nations resolutions and he should allow us to resume the inspections. If he has nothing to hide, if he's not trying to develop weapons of mass destruction, then he shouldn't care whether Americans or anyone else are on the inspection team. This may be just another dodge. The resolution is clear, the inspection regime is unambiguous, and we have confidence in it, and that's why we participate in it. And that's what he ought to do. 
The President. That would be a big mistake. But the U-2 flights—let me say, the U-2 flights, which you reported on extensively in the last couple of days, are flights in which we are involved, but they are carried out under the authority of the United Nations for a United Nations purpose. And we will continue to consult with our allies on that. 
But let me say again, the world has an interest, stated in the United Nations Security resolution, in preventing Iraq from developing weapons of mass destruction. That's what this is all about. There is an inspection regime which has clearly been approved by the United Nations. And Saddam Hussein must restore respect and opportunity for that inspection regime. That's all this 
The President. I believe, at this moment, we should do everything we can to resolve this diplomatically, and we should reserve judgment. This ought to be resolved diplomatically. There is a procedure there, and the Iraqis should let it be carried out by the United Nations. 


Remarks on Fast-Track Trade Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
November 5, 1997

The President. Well, as I said yesterday, that was a decision for Mr. Butler to make. But if I were in his position, I wouldn't draw too much of a conclusion from it. They want the United Nations group to be able to talk to Saddam Hussein and to be able to speak directly and frankly. But Mr. Butler has, in his tenure, has done a good job of doing the inspections, and he made it clear that the U-2 flights would be resumed. I personally felt that it was important. 
So I think that you've got to say that Mr. Butler's got a good record of doing these inspections, that he's aggressively determined to stop the development of a weapons of mass destruction program, and he did say the flights would be resumed. So if I were Saddam Hussein I wouldn't draw too much inference from it except to say they'd like to have a talk in the most open circumstances possible.
The President. I don't think it's fruitful for me to second-guess Mr. Butler now. One of the things that I have seen in his—he hasn't been there very long, but since he's been there he's been quite aggressive. And keep in mind what our goal is here. Our goal is to use these inspections to try to ensure that a weapons of mass destruction program is not developed. And since there is absolutely no reason to believe that Mr. Butler has been anything other than extremely faithful to his task, I think we should let these talks unfold. 
I would have been disturbed if the flight had been suspended and there hadn't been a clear statement that they would be resumed shortly. But since he made a clear statement that they would be resumed shortly, I think we have to give him the benefit of the doubt on this, and let's see if we can work through it. 
But we just—look, this is a frustrating policy, the one we're following, because it requires long-term patience and discipline. It's frustrating for him; it's frustrating for us; it's frustrating for everybody else. But you know, there is a reason these United Nations resolutions were passed. There's a reason this inspection regime was set up. We think it's a bad idea for any more dictators who have shown aggression toward their neighbors to develop the capacity to have nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons. We think it's a bad idea. And we know of no way to do that—to avoid that in peaceful terms than to have some sort of inspection regime. 
And as I said yesterday, the UNSCOM inspection regime has actually led to the destruction of more dangerous weapons than the Desert Storm did, because it's been done with great discipline over a period of years. So I would ask the American people and our allies around the world not to get too frustrated, to be patient, but to be firm, and let's try to hold on to this inspection regime, because that is the most peaceful way of dealing with this and permitting everyone to go on with their lives.


Exchange With Reporters at the George Bush Presidential Library in College Station, Texas
November 6, 1997

President Clinton. Of course, that may be why he wants to interrupt the inspections, and why it's so important that they resume immediately. You know, the idea of getting the Americans out may just be a ruse; it may be that there is something that they're covering up, which is exactly why the international community has to resume the inspections


Remarks on Fast-Track Trade Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
November 6, 1997

The President. Well, it would be a mistake for them to shoot down a plane. But we have a team there working for the United Nations, and our policy is clear—and I don't mean American policy—world policy. What they need to do is to resume the inspections. And the team is coming home this weekend, and we'll see where we are then and where we go from there.

The President. Well, we learned, you know, back during the Desert Shield/Desert Storm period that his motivations are somewhat complex and difficult to fathom from time to time. All I can say is that the reason that we have the inspection regime and the reason we are determined to resume it is that, whatever else happens and however long he stays there, the international community has decided that he mustn't be allowed to resume the production of weapons of mass destruction. So he can have whatever motive he wants. 
We have tried to work with the United Nations to deal with the humanitarian concerns of the Iraqi people. We are very concerned about those. But we cannotpermit [originally can’t permit; changed for Yoshikoder” a man with his record, the regime with their policies, to get into the weapons of mass destruction business if we can stop it. And that is what the inspection regime is designed to do, and there is a lot of evidence, you know, that it has been quite successful. So all I know is that whatever his motives are, I just want to start the inspections again



Remarks on Fast-Track Trade Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
November 7, 1997

The President. Well, first of all, the delegation that was in Iraq is on its way home now, and they will report, and then the international community must decide what to do. I think it is important that we be resolute, and I think it would be a mistake to rule in or out any particular course of action at this moment. 
The President. No. I don't. But we have to be resolute and firm. Keep in mind what is at stake here. The international community has made a decision embodied in the United Nations resolution that Saddam Hussein must notbepermitted to resume producing weapons of mass destruction. The advisers in UNSCOM, the inspectors there, they are the eyes and ears of the international community. They have been very successful, as you know, in doing their job. That is the issue. 
And whether he's firm or weak, in the end, the international community has to be firm to make sure that his regime does not resume its capacity to develop weapons of mass destruction. 
The President. Well, let me say, I think we have to wait until the U.N. diplomats come back. We have to counsel with our allies. We have to give them a chance to be heard and see what we're going to do. But I have seen no indication that any of our allies are weakening on this. Everyone seems to be united in their determination to restore the inspections on terms that the United Nations decides, not on Saddam Hussein's terms. 
The President. Well, on the Tariq Aziz question, we normally give anybody a visa to come to the United Nations, and that has been our policy. However, I don't think it ought to be used for stonewalling or foot-dragging, and we have that under review. 
On the second issue, I can only say what I said before: I think we have to be firm and resolute. At this moment, in my view, it would be a mistake to rule in or out any option


Interview With Tim Russert of "Meet the Press"
November 9, 1997

The President. Those flights are United Nations flights, even though they're American pilots in those planes, and you cannot dictate to the United Nations what we do. They will resume, and if you shoot at them, you'll be making a big mistake. 
The President. I believe that's how the Pentagon characterized it. I think the important thing is that Saddam Hussein needs to know it would be a big mistake. We will not tolerate his efforts to murder our pilots acting on behalf of the United Nations under United Nations Security Council resolutions. 
Listen, all that man has to do is to let the monitors go back to doing their job. I think it's important that the American people understand what these monitors are doing. People read this word "UNSCOM" in the paper, and they don't know—you know, it sounds like a bad cold or something. These monitors have been there working since the end of the Gulf war to look for weapons of mass destruction or materials used to make weapons of mass destruction. 
They have found and destroyed more weapons capacity, the monitors have, than were destroyed in the entire Gulf war, which shows you that Saddam Hussein has not stopped trying to develop this capacity. After all, keep in mind, this is a man who used chemical weapons on the Iranians; he used chemical weapons on his own people. And what they're doing there is terribly important. We do not want him to have chemical or biological weapons capacity. We believe he has the latent capacity to produce more SCUD missiles. And we all remember how he aimed the SCUD's at Israel during the Gulf war. 
So what they're doing is terribly important. And he needs to let them go back and do their job. None of us are going to be bullied by him. 
The President. Never. 
The President. No. 
The President. Well, that's a different question. The group that we sent over there, the U.N. sent over there, to talk to Saddam Hussein, is coming back. They're going to make their report. Then I expect the United Nations to take very strong and unambiguous action to make it perfectly clear that he has to comply. 
Now, in the past, we've been able to work these things out. We've been up to this point before and been able to work them out. If he doesn't, then the world community will have to take some action. 
The President. That may be. He may be trying to divide the coalition as well, with the promise that he'll sell oil at good prices and make money for other countries. But so far, I have to tell you, I've been impressed with the unity of the world community. I think that he picked a peculiar way to try to divide the coalition. He seems to be frustrated that the sanctions haven't been lifted. But all he has to do is to allow the inspectors to do their job and quit trying to stockpile the ability to make these weapons of mass destruction. That's all he's got to do. 
The President. We will never have normal relations with Iraq as long as Iraq is out of compliance with these basic resolutions of the United Nations. Now, it appears that Saddam Hussein has had several years since the Gulf war to put his country in compliance, and he has declined to do so. 
The President. I don't want to rule anything in or out. I think it's—at a moment like this, it's very important that the President maintain all options and signal none. And that's where I want to be. But I think that Saddam Hussein needs to understand that this is a serious business. And this is not just the President of the United States; the American people feel this way. And it's not just the American people; it's the world community. 
There is a United Nations resolution that says that he has to permit inspectors to look into what he's doing to make sure he doesn't again develop the capacity to make and deploy weapons of mass destruction. He's one of the few people who's done it and used it. And we all have an interest in stopping him. 
The President. He will comply eventually or we'll have to see what happens then. It will not be without consequence if he does not comply.


Remarks on Fast-Track Trade Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
November 10, 1997

The President. Well, first of all, as you know, the United Nations U-2 plane was not fired upon in its flight. But—and that's a good thing, but it does not change the larger issue which is that the U.N. inspections have been stopped by Saddam Hussein. So the next step is to get a very strong resolution from the United Nations manifesting the determination of the international community to resume those inspections. And that should happen shortly, as the report is made from the people who went to Iraq. And then we will have to go about manifesting that, demonstrating our determination to start those inspections again. 
The President. Well, of course, I'm concerned about the Americans. I'm concerned about the other United Nations personnel who are there. I'm concerned about all of them. But again, I am trying to work with Mr. Butler and with the United Nations on a daily basis to do what seems right and best. And it was the judgment of the United Nations people and Mr. Butler that they ought to stay as long as they had a chance to resume their work and that they wanted to do that. But I assure you, I'm quite concerned with the safety of all the people that are there on behalf of Americans and on behalf of the world community trying to keep this weapons of mass destruction program from being restarted. 
I believe we are considering every aspect of this issue. We spent all weekend working exhaustively on it, and we're going to watch it very carefully in the days ahead. 
The President. First of all, we've been up for a couple of days working on fast track and dealing with Iraq, and you will, I hope, understand why we can't make a judgment about that. We will bring it back up at the appropriate time and when we think we can pass it. But we're very close now, under the most burdensome of circumstances. So all we need is a few breaks to have more than enough votes to pass it. And what I would like to do is to bring it back up at a time when we can pass it with a big vote and a much stronger vote from both parties. And I think there's every change that we will be able to do that. And I look forward to it, and I expect it to happen.



Remarks at a Veterans Day Ceremony in Arlington, Virginia
November 11, 1997

And in the Persian Gulf, our pilots are patrolling the no-fly zones in Iraq, making it clear to Saddam Hussein that another move against Kuwait or Saudi Arabia would be a big mistake and helping to enforce the international community's sanctions against Iraq. Saddam's efforts to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction and his interference with the United Nations inspectors who are keeping him from doing so are unacceptable. 
I want every single American to understand what is at stake here. These inspectors, since 1991, have discovered and destroyed more weapons of mass destruction potential than was destroyed in Iraq in the entire Gulf war. They are doing what they should be doing. They must get back to work, and the international community must demand it.



Remarks at a Democratic Governors' Association Reception
November 12, 1997

We also are working on expanding NATO to ensure our partnership in security in Europe. We've passed the Chemical Weapons Convention, a big issue. One of the big disputes we're having with Saddam Hussein now and these inspectors is that these inspectors in Iraq have found enough potential chemical, biological, and incipient nuclear technology, more than was destroyed in the Gulf war. We want to wipe the prospect of chemical warfare off the face of the Earth. We don't want a bunch of terrorists with laboratories in briefcases going from airport to airport wreaking havoc in the world of the 21st century that our children will live in. We took a big step toward that. So this has been a good year


Remarks on Signing the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1998
November 13, 1997

Ladies and gentlemen, before I make my remarks about this legislation that we have all worked on, I'd like to say a few words about yesterday's United Nations Security Council resolution on Iraq. 
Plainly, it sent theright message: Comply now with the U.N. resolutions and let the UNSCOM inspection team go back to work. Iraq's announcement this morning to expel the Americans from the inspection team is clearly unacceptable and a challenge to the international community. 
Let me remind you all again—I will say this every time I discuss this issue—these inspectors, in the last 6 years, have uncovered more weapons of mass destruction potential and destroyed it than was destroyed in the entire Gulf war. It is important to the safety of the world that they continue their work. I intend to pursue this matter in a very determined way



Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico and an Exchange With Reporters
November 14, 1997

President Clinton. Let me first of all say that I believe that the Secretary-General and our team, the United Nations team, made theright decision in withdrawing the team of inspectors there and not just leaving them there. But the real issue here is, how can we stop Saddam Hussein from reconstituting his weapons of mass destruction program, and what will achieve that goal. Any specific tactic will be designed to achieve that goal. 
The world has got to understand that he had a weapons of mass destruction program, that he is one of the few people who has ever used chemical weapons against both his enemies and his own citizens, and that there will be a big market for such weapons out there among terrorists and other groups. 
This is not just a replay of the Gulf war; this is not throw a man who invaded a country, Kuwait, out of the country and reestablish territorial integrity. This is about the security of the 21st century and the problems everybody is going to have to face dealing with chemical weapons. 
So as you know, I don't think it's appropriate for me to speculate about what we might or might not do with specific options, but I think that we have to steel ourselves and be determined that the will of the international community, expressed in the United Nations Security Council resolutions, will have to prevail. 
This is simply—it's too dangerous an issue that would set too powerful a precedent about the impotence of the United Nations, if we didn't proceed on this, in the face of what I have considered to be one of the three or four most significant security threats that all of our people will face for the next whole generation, this weapons of mass destruction proliferation. We've got to stop it. 
President Clinton. Well, I'm ordering the carrier in there because I think it's appropriate under the circumstances. And let me say on the first question that one of the reasons the United States has supported the U.N. decision to continue the flights is that if we're not on the ground, it's been more important that we observe what we can in the air. And we are working this very hard. 
We also—I want to say this is a United Nations endeavor, a United Nations resolution we want to implement. We want very much to work with our allies. We want to make sure that we've done all we can to see that they agree with us about the gravity of the situation, and I expect—the Secretary of State is meeting with a lot of the foreign ministers over the next several days, and I will be talking to a number of heads of state, and we'll keep working this. I don't want to put a timetable on myself, because it's not just me, but we're working it hard. 
President Clinton. Well, if he does, that would be a mistake. And of course, what he says his objective is, is to relieve the people of Iraq, and presumably the government, of the burden of the sanctions. What he has just done is to ensure that the sanctions will be there until the end of time or as long as he lasts. So I think that if his objective is to try to get back into the business of manufacturing vast stores of weapons of mass destruction and then try to either use them or sell them, then at some point the United States, and more than the United States, would be more than happy to try to stop that. 
But if his objective is to lift the sanctions and to divide the coalition and get people more sympathetic with him, I think that he has undermined his objective because we could never, ever agree to any modifications of the larger economic sanctions on Iraq as long as he's out of compliance. And by definition, that's the way the U.N. resolution works. When I say "we" there, I mean the whole world community. So I would think he would not be furthering his objectives, if his stated objectives are his objectives. 

Remarks on the Situation in Iraq
November 14, 1997

Two days ago and again last night, the United Nations Security Council sent a clear, unanimous message to Iraq: Stop obstructing the international weapons inspectors who are the eyes and ears of the world on your weapons of mass destruction capability. 
Instead of complying with the unequivocal will of the international community, Saddam chose to expel the weapons inspectors from Iraq and, in so doing, to defy the United Nations. Saddam has spent the better part of the last two decades and much of the wealth of his nation not on providing for the needs and advancing the hopes of the Iraqi people but on a program to build an arsenal of the most terrible weapons of destruction—nuclear, chemical, biological—and on the missiles to carry them to faraway places. 
The U.N. inspectors have done a remarkable job of finding and destroying the weapons and the weapons potential he was hiding and preventing him from building new weapons. These quiet inspectors have destroyed more weapons of mass destruction potential over the last 6 years than was destroyed in the entire Gulf war. Their work is important to the safety of Saddam's neighbors and, indeed, to people all around the world. It must be allowed to continue. 
Today and in the days ahead, the United States will work intensively with our allies and our friends in the region and around the world to convince Iraq to comply with the will of the international community as expressed in the United Nations resolution. 
Meanwhile, the U-2 missions over Iraq must continue. Without inspectors on the ground, it is more important than ever to monitor events from the air. And we will maintain a strong military presence in the Gulf. To that end, I have ordered today the aircraft carrier George Washington to the region as a prudent measure to help assure that we have the forces we need for any contingency. 
This is a crisis of Saddam's making. It can be unmade only when he can no longer threaten the international community with weapons of mass destruction.


Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Luncheon in Sacramento
November 15, 1997

Congress has just gone home, and this was a remarkably good year. It's a 2-year congressional session—we have a lot to do next year— but we did pass the first balanced budget in a generation. We ratified the chemical weapons treaty, which will help to protect our children and our grandchildren and involves a lot of what is at stake in Iraq today. We made progress on expanding NATO in ways that will give us a chance to have a 21st century where Europe is a source of peace and prosperity, not a cause for war that involves Americans. We passed a wonderful adoption bill that I will sign in the next few days to facilitate adoptions in many ways in America. We passed a huge increase in medical research in all kinds of areas and the best package to help families with diabetes, according to the American Diabetes Association, since the discovery of insulin 70 years ago. So it was a very good year for the American people in the Congress

That is fundamentally what is at stake in the standoff we're having in Iraq today. I don't want you to look at this backward through the prism of the Gulf war and think it's a replay. I want you to look at it forward and think about it in terms of the innocent Japanese people that died in the subway when the sarin gas was released, and how important it is for every responsible government in the world to do everything that can possibly be done not to let big stores of chemical or biological weapons fall into the wrong hands, not to let irresponsible people develop the capacity to put them in warheads on missiles or put them in briefcases that could be exploded in small rooms


Remarks to Cessna Employees in Wichita, Kansas
November 17, 1997

Ladies and gentlemen, before I make the few remarks I'd like to make on this issue, I think it is appropriate, since it's my first appearance of the week, to just give you a brief update on the situation in Iraq. Even when I was walking through here, a number of people asked me about it. 
First, it's important that you understand what is at stake here. Since the end of the Gulf war, for 6 years, inspectors, under the authority of the United Nations, have been trying to find and destroy Saddam Hussein's capacity to threaten his neighbors and potentially others around the world with nuclear or biological or chemical weapons. They have found and destroyed more weapons of mass destruction potential in the last 6 years—these quiet inspectors whom no one knows—they have destroyed more of this potential than was destroyed in the entire Gulf war with all of the air attacks. 
What they are doing matters. It matters to you, to your children, and to the future, because this is a challenge we must face not just in Iraq but throughout the world. We must notallow the 21st century to go forward under a cloud of fear that terrorists, organized criminals, drug traffickers will terrorize people with chemical and biological weapons the way the nuclear threat hung over the heads of the whole world through the last half of this century. That is what is at issue. 
In his defiance of the international community, Saddam Hussein has forced the withdrawal of the inspectors. Now, I am trying to settle this issue peacefully, but our diplomatic efforts must be backed by our strong military capability. We cannotruleout any options. But the bottom line is, we have to understand this, it is essential that those inspectors go back to work. The safety of the children of the world depends upon it. And I ask for your support



Remarks at a Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Dinner in St. Louis
November 17, 1997

Let me say that, as all of you know just from reading the press, this is a rather challenging time for our country, and I don't have anything else to add about what I'm trying to deal with in Iraq than what I've already said. But it has made me a little more reflective even than normal, and I'd like to try to put this race for the Senate in some sort of larger context for you so you can see how I see it and why I came here.


Remarks on Signing the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997
November 19, 1997

Before I make my brief remarks, if you'll forgive me and understand, I have to make one public statement today about the situation in Iraq. 
As I have said before, I prefer to resolve this situation peacefully, with our friends and allies, and I am working hard to do just that. But I want to be clear again about the necessary objective of any diplomacy now underway. Iraq must comply with the unanimous will of the international community and let the weapons inspectors resume their work to prevent Iraq from developing an arsenal of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. The inspectors must be able to do so without interference. That's our top line; that's our bottom line. I want to achieve it diplomatically. But we're taking every step to make sure we are prepared to pursue whatever options are necessary



Remarks at the Ecumenical Breakfast
November 20, 1997

But in light of developments in the last day in Iraq, I would like to say just a word about that. The meeting of the foreign ministers last night in Geneva strongly reaffirmed our unanimous position: Saddam Hussein must comply unconditionally with the will of the international community and allow all the weapons inspectors back to Iraq so they can get on with doing their jobs without interference. After that meeting, he said he would do that. In the coming days we will wait and see whether he does, in fact, comply with the will of the international community. 
I just want to reiterate that the United States must remain and will remain resolute in our determination to prevent him from threatening his neighbors or the world with nuclear, chemical, or biological weapons. This is an issue that I hope will become even more important to all Americans and a greater subject of discussion. We must do that. That is the duty we have to our children


Remarks on Receiving the Man of Peace Award
November 21, 1997

In recent weeks, as Iraq has challenged the United Nations, we have been reminded again of how vital it is to continue forging a community of shared values throughout the region to strengthen the bonds among all people who oppose intimidation and terror, and how we will never ever do that until there is peace between Israel and her neighbors, and that the absence of that peace makes the other difficulties, tensions, and frustrations all the more troubling because it compounds them and undermines our ability to seek a unified solution. 
I think I should say just a few words about Iraq before closing. Early this morning, the international weapons inspectors arrived back in Baghdad, including the Americans assigned to the team. Their unconditional return is an important achievement for the international community. It shows once again that determined diplomacy backed by the potential of force is the only way to deal with Saddam Hussein. We must make sure that inspectors are able to resume their mission unimpeded. The inspector team has a clear mission and a clear responsibility. They must be able to proceed with their work without interference, to find, to destroy, to prevent Iraq from rebuilding nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and the missiles to carry them. 
Let there be no mistake: We must be constantly vigilant and resolute, and with our friends and partners, we must be especially determined to prevent Saddam's ability to reconstitute his weapons of mass destruction program. Our children and our grandchildren will not forgive us unless we honor the work of these UNSCOM professionals. We must not let our children be exposed to the indiscriminate availability and potential of use and actual use of the biological and chemical and smaller scale nuclear weapons which could terrorize the 21st century. 
The UNSCOM team of dedicated professionals have labored quietly and effectively for 6 years. The past 2 weeks have made them famous people in the world. Let us not so much cherish their fame as value their mission. And let us be determined to see that it can go forward.



Remarks on Arrival and an Exchange With Reporters in Denver, Colorado
November 22, 1997

The President. I reiterated my position, and I'll be glad to say it again. The United States is concerned about the welfare of the people of Iraq; we don't want to see them suffer unnecessarily. We took the lead in putting in place a policy in the United Nations that permits us to expand humanitarian assistance there. But the most important thing is that those inspectors need to be back at work, and they need to work without impediment. Mr. Butler gave a report today to the United Nations Security Council which points out that there are still impediments to their work, and he recommends a more robust inspection regime. That is what we need to focus on. 
I understand President Yeltsin's position, and I thank him for the work they did to end the crisis, at least temporarily—we hope it's ended permanently, but we're not sure. But keep in mind, it is more difficult for these inspectors to do their work with regard to biological and chemical weapons than it is with regard to missile and nuclear issues under their jurisdiction. And we have to do more. 
And again I say, I want to compliment the members of the press. We sometimes have our differences, but I think there has been a real effort to make the public aware of the storage of chemical and biological agents that Iraq admitted having in 1989 and now has no records, cannot produce records proving it destroyed— and then the admitted stores that were there in 1995, just 2 years ago. 
So I just want to—what I emphasized to President Yeltsin is we have come a long way by working together, and we have to continue to work together. And the decisions about what to do with the inspections should be made based on the evidence, the facts, and the professional judgment of the inspectors. Neither the political inclinations of the United States nor of our allies should control those decisions. 
This is about the future safety not only of the people in Iran and on its borders but indeed of the whole world. It's not hard to carry this stuff around in small amounts once it's developed. 
So it was a very good conversation, a very forthright one, and I thought a constructive one, and I believe it will enable us to take the next steps by working together.

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Luncheon in Denver
November 22, 1997

And just this last week—let me just close with this—I had a week—it was a killer of a week. And what you saw probably in the headlines was the work we were doing on Iraq, but let me tell you what else went on last week.

We announced—you saw yesterday, we announced that we're going to have the first permanent peace talks between North and South Korea, in the four-party context we proposed, since the end of the Korean war. We're working through a very difficult situation in Iraq and, I think, in an appropriate way. And I know those things have dominated the news. But if you think about what happened in America for Americans this week, there were a couple of times when all of us just looked at each other and said, "You know, this is what we got in public life to do. This is what makes all the other stuff worth it."


Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Reception in Denver
November 22, 1997

Everyone knows that last week I was overwhelmingly preoccupied, this last week, with the situation in Iraq. And I don't have much more to add to that, except one of our biggest obligations is to deal with the new security challenges of the 21st century. And while the nuclear threat between two great countries is receding—I talked to President Yeltsin today about his efforts to get the START II treaty ratified there so we can bringing these nuclear weapons down, getting more countries to sign on to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty—we must face an enhanced threat of chemical and biological warfare practiced by terrorists, organized criminals, drug traffickers, and others in the 21st century. And it's our solemn obligation to minimize that threat for you in the next 50 years, the same way we avoided having another nuclear war—a nuclear war in the last 50 years.


Remarks at a Reception for Senator Patty Murray in Seattle, Washington
November 22, 1997

I ran for President because I wanted to reclaim the future for our children; because I wanted to restore a sense of possibility and confidence to people, that everybody who worked hard and did his or her best ought to have a chance; and because I really thought we had to do far more to prepare this country for the 21st century if we wanted to have opportunity for every responsible citizen, if we wanted to have a community of one America across all the lines that divide us, and if we wanted to continue to lead the world for peace and freedom and prosperity. I hope you have seen, in the difficult week we have just had over the weapons inspections in Iraq, how important it is for your country to continue to stand up for peace and freedom and security around the world


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Jean Chretien of Canada in Vancouver, British Columbia
November 23, 1997

President Clinton. I can't blame him for saying that because I've said that. I've also told you that the crisis may not be over. All I can tell you is that the international community, through the United Nations, has resolutions that relate to Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program. We have an inspection team that I think has done a very good job, often under very trying circumstances. The leader of that team, Mr. Butler, made a very forthright and clear report yesterday to the Security Council, and they have taken what I believe so far is appropriate action. 
It is clear that there is a massive amount of work that has to be done there, especially in the chemical and biological inspection areas, in order for UNSCOM to fulfill the mandate it has been given by the United Nations. And I am determined that it should do so, and I believe all of us are


Exchange With Reporters Prior to Discussions With President Jiang Zemin of China in Vancouver
November 24, 1997

President Clinton. Well, let me say, first of all, like all issues, this should be looked at on the basis of the real underlying facts. The term "palace" has a different meaning in Iraq than it would to the ordinary American. The ordinary American would hear the word "palace," and they would think, a very fancy residence for a head of state or a member of a royal family. 
There are 78 such palaces in Iraq. Many of them are huge compounds. Some of them actually encompass more land than Washington, DC, does. So to put 78 palaces, when you look at what they really are, off limits according to Mr. Butler and our inspectors would mean that they could not adequately search for chemical and biological weapons operations. Our position is, if the inspector team says they ought to do it, that's a lot of land, a lot of buildings, and they ought to be able to do what they think is necessary. 
President Clinton. Well, they have acknowledged that in 1995—as late as 1995, that they had quite substantial stores of weapons and potential weapons that would be prohibited and subject to inspection and destruction under the U.N. resolution. And I just want the inspectors to be able to do their job. My suspicions are not important. The only thing that matters here is that the inspectors can do their job under the U.N. resolutions. 

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Dinner
December 1, 1997

One final issue I wanted to mention is this whole matter involving our dispute with Iraq. This is not about the United States and Iraq, per se, nor is it about an attempt to rehash the Gulf war. This is a question of whether we are going to establish in the world a regime that will limit the capacity of rogue nations and illegal groups to manufacture, store, disseminate, sell, or use dangerous biological and chemical weapons or small-scale nuclear weapons. I think it is imperative that we try.


Remarks Announcing Appointments to the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare and an Exchange With Reporters
December 5, 1997

The President. Well, I certainly think he's exposed his motives and his real concerns to the entire world today. You know, it wasn't very long ago—how many days ago was it that he had this symbolic funeral for children, blaming the world community in general and the United States in particular for the death of Iraqi children. Let me remind you, when we got the United Nations resolution passed, we and the others who supported it—986—to allow him to sell oil to get food and medicine for his people, even while he was continuing to resist getting rid of his entire chemical and biological weapons arsenal, he delayed the full implementation of that for a year and a half. He is in no position to point the finger at anyone else in the world for the suffering of his own people. And once again today he has proved that he is responsible for the suffering of his own people. 
The rest of us are more than happy to let him sell oil in amounts necessary to generate the cash to alleviate the human suffering of the people of Iraq. That's what 986 was all about. This is not about 986. This is about some other way that he can manipulate the feelings of people beyond the borders of Iraq, even if he has to let innocent children die to do it, so he can continue to pursue a weapons of mass destruction program. And it's wrong, and the world community should not let him get away with it.


Remarks at the Arkansas Democratic National Committee Dinner
December 13, 1997

We've got a lot of challenges in the world. The challenge in Iraq, the general challenge of weapons of mass destruction, the chemical and biological weapons. They could bother our kids a lot, and we're going to work hard to see that they don't. We've got financial upheavals in Asia now. And since Thanksgiving, Secretary Rubin and I have been talking at all kinds of odd hours because of the time difference in Asia and here. I was on the phone last night at 11 to Asia. But we're managing the best we can


The President's News Conference
December 16, 1997
I briefly want to review the progress we've made in the last year and our mission to prepare America for that new century. Even as we reap the hard-earned profits of the strongest economy in a generation, our Nation refused to be complacent. We confronted big issues in 1997. We passed a plan to balance the budget. We made college affordable and community college virtually free to every American. We cut taxes for middle class families with children. We saved Medicare for another decade. We extended health insurance to 5 million children in lower income working families. We cut crime, reduced welfare, strengthened our schools. We made the world safer by ratifying the Chemical Weapons Convention. And at Kyoto, with the Vice President's leadership, we took an important step toward protecting the environment even as we promote global economy growth. We renewed the consensus for honest engagement with China. We stood strong against a rogue regime in Iraq. We made real progress toward lasting peace in Bosnia. Next week I will personally thank our troops there and talk to the Bosnian people about their responsibilities for the future

The President. Well, Saddam Hussein has been in defiance of the United Nations since the end of the Gulf war. That's why we have a system of sanctions on him. And I am willing to maintain the sanctions as long as he does not comply with the resolutions. 
If you're asking me are there other options that I might consider taking under certain circumstances, I would notruleout [originally wouldn’t rule out; changed for Yoshikoder] anything; I never have, and I won't. But I think it's important that you remember, since the end of the Gulf war, the world community has known that he was interested in not only rebuilding his conventional military authority but that he was interested in weapons of mass destruction. And a set of sanctions was imposed on him. There are those that would like to lift the sanctions. I am not among them. I am not in favor of lifting sanctions until he complies. Furthermore, if there is further obstruction from the mission—the United Nations' mission in doing its job, we have to consider other options. But keep in mind, he has not come out, as some people have suggested, ahead on this last confrontation, because now the world community is much less likely to vote to lift any sanctions on him that will enable him to rebuild his military apparatus and continue to oppress his people and threaten his neighbors and others in the world. 
So that's my position on that. I feel that we have to be very firm. It is clear to me that he has still not come to terms with his obligations to the international community to open all sites to inspections. We need to wait until Mr. Butler gets back, make a full report, and see where we are and where we go. But this is something that we are following on a—I and my administration are following on a daily basis and very closely. And the United States must remain steadfast in this. But we now have more people who are more sympathetic with being firm than we did before he provoked, needlessly, the last incident.
The President. Well, if he is, he's clever-crazy on occasion, and then sometimes he does something that seems maddeningly stupid. Though, in this case, I think he made a calculated decision that was wrong. That is, I don't think this was—I think there was a calculated decision here that other countries wanted to do business with him, that he owed money to other countries from before the Gulf war that he couldn't pay and never would be able to pay unless he could do more business, that the war is fading into memory—you know, it's not imminent now—and that the burden of maintaining the sanctions had wearied many of those with responsibility for doing so, and that there might be a way to split the alliance here. I also think he knew that the suffering of the Iraqi people is something which has touched the hearts of the whole world, and he thought it was a card he could play. So for all those reasons I think that he thought this decision—finally, I think that he felt, probably, that the United States would never vote to lift the sanctions on him no matter what he did. There are some people who believe that. Now, I think he was dead wrong on virtually every point, but I don't know that it was a decision of a crazy person. I just think he badly miscalculated. 
I will say again, we supported—the United States initiated the oil for food and medicine resolution. I am glad—I would support broadening it. I still don't think the caloric intake of the average Iraqi is sufficient. I'm worried about those kids. I'm worried about the people who are hurt over there. But the biggest problem they've got is him. He delayed the implementation of the oil for food embargo for a year and a half to try to play on global sympathy for the suffering of his own people. So that's not an issue for me. 
Furthermore, I have done everything I could not to have the American people overly personalize our relationship with him. To me it is a question of his actions. But I do believe that he has shown, whether you think it's madness or not, that he was willing to rain SCUD missiles on Israel and use chemical warfare on the Iranians and on the Kurds. So whatever his motives are, I think it best serves the United States—our interests, our values, and our role in the world—to judge him by his actions and to insist that we proceed, in return for substantive progress, on concrete actions. I think that is the practically right thing to do and the morally right thing to do
First of all, I think it is very important that we do everything reasonable to anchor Turkey to the West. They are a secular Islamic government that has been a dependable ally in NATO. They have also supported a lot of our operations in and around Iraq since the Gulf war, and they have been a good ally of ours. I think that is terribly important. If you look at the size of the country, if you look at its geostrategic significance, where it is, what it can block, and what it could open the doors to, it is terribly important



Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Democratic National Committee Dinner in New York City
January 8, 1998

With Iraq, keep in mind what happened. We've already achieved a not insignificant portion of our objective. Saddam Hussein's goal was to say, "I'm going to throw all these inspectors out and leave them out until you drop some or all of the sanctions." And we said, "You don't understand. We'll leave the sanctions on until hell freezes over unless you let the inspections go forward." 
Now, I have notruledout—or in—any further action of any kind because there are still all kinds of unresolved questions about the integrity of the inspection process, and we're working on that. But keep in mind, Iraq's capacity to do damage to its neighbors has been dramatically eroded because of the sanctions process. There are a lot of countries that would like to relax it because they would benefit from that relaxation. But we have an obligation to try to limit the vulnerability not only of Americans but of the rest of the world to chemical and biological warfare. 
This is not about refighting the Gulf war. It's not about Kuwait or anybody else. It's about—there's a reason those U.N. resolutions passed and a reason the world is rightfully concerned about trying to contain the damage of chemical and biological warfare. 
So we're going to stay firm, and I'm notruling in or out anything, but we're being vigilant. But keep in mind, what he tried to do didn't work. What he wanted was a relaxation of the sanctions in return for just going back to business as usual, and that strategy failed. And therefore, his capacity to do more harm is not materializing



Remarks on Ending Drug Use and Drug Availability for Offenders and an Exchange With Reporters
January 12, 1998

The President. Well, I certainly hope not. Now, of course it hasn't happened yet. But I think that it's important to make just a few basic points here. 
Number one, if Saddam Hussein does this, it is a clear and serious violation of the United Nations Security Council resolution. 
Number two, the United States had nothing whatever to do with selecting this team, the people on it, or its composition. The team that's there is part of a larger team of people, 43 people from 16 different countries. There are a substantial number of Americans on this team. They were picked by the person who is in charge of the inspection process because of their technical expertise. Everyone who goes there should be technically qualified, and the United States has not attempted to influence the composition of the people on the teams. But certainly Saddam Hussein shouldn't be able to pick and choose who does this work. That's for the United Nations to decide. 
If they are denied theright to do their job tomorrow, then I expect the United Nations Security Council to take strong and appropriate action


Remarks Supporting Health Care Bill of Rights Legislation and an Exchange With Reporters
January 14, 1998

The President. Well, I don't know what the facts are, but I think Mr. Butler's concerns are clearly what justifies the inspection regime. In other words, no American has to decide whether he or she believes Iraq or not, and no American can possibly know whether Mr. Butler is right or not, because all he said is he wants to take a look-see. 
There is a framework for inspections. I am very encouraged, by the way, that we got a good statement out of the United Nations Security Council today. It is clear that the international community knows that Saddam Hussein is doing the wrong thing. And we have got to remain steadfast in our determination to continue the inspections process in a nonpolitical way where the leader of Iraq does not get to determine who, when, and what is going on in that inspections process. 
I don't know the answer to your question, but I do know that we ought to be able to find out. That's what the U.N. resolution says. 
The President. Well, if Mr. Butler says that he believes that he's got enough to go on, we should view it seriously enough to insist that the inspections go forward. 
We don't want to do them like they've done us, like they did the head of the inspection team, the American head of the inspection team, where they accused him of being a spy. And we didn't—the United States Government doesn't even know who is on what team from a day-to-day basis. They're all picked by the United Nations. So we don't want to convict them in advance. But if there is enough evidence for Mr. Butler to say that, then he ought to be able to go look. 
I would remind you that in 1995, they admitted having stocks of chemical and biological weapons potential that were very troubling. That they admitted. So that's another reason we've got to keep going and continue these inspections. This is a case where the United Nations actually had it right. They've got a good framework, and we just need everybody to stiffen their resolve now so we can go back and do our jobs. And we have to be absolutely resolute in insisting that it be done.


Remarks on Tobacco Marketing to Youth and an Exchange With Reporters
January 15, 1998

The President. On Iraq, let me say that Mr. Butler is going back to Iraq with the strong support of the United Nations. I am very encouraged that even those who had been more sympathetic to Iraq saw through this totally unacceptable action. So now we have to see what happens. He ought to be given access. He's going back there; he's got the support of the U.N. We're going to watch this a day at a time and see what happens. Thank you.


Interview With Jim Lehrer of the PBS "News Hour"
January 21, 1998

The President. They seem to want to wait until early March to open the—— 
The President. Iraq—open the sites that Mr. Butler believes that ought to be open. That's a problem for us because we believe that we have to do everything we can, as quickly as we can, to check for chemical and biological weapons stocks. And as I told the American people the last time we had the standoff with Saddam, before he relented and let the inspectors go back, my concern is not to re-fight the Gulf war; my concern is to prepare our people for a new century, not only in positive ways like creating a big international financial framework that works for them, as that we just talked about, but also to make sure we have the tools to protect ourselves against chemical and biological weapons. 
So tonight I cannotruleout, or in, any options. But I can tell you I'm very concerned about this, and I don't think the American people should lose sight of the issue. What's the issue? Weapons of mass destruction. What's the answer? The U.N. inspectors. What's the problem? Saddam Hussein can't say who, where, or when about these inspection teams. That has to be done by the professionals. And sooner or later, something is going to give here, and I'm just very much hoping that we can reason with him before that happens. But we've got to have those sites open. 
The President. The United States does not relish moving alone, because we live in a world that is increasingly interdependent. We'd like to be partners with other people. But sometimes we have to be prepared to move alone. You used the anthrax example. Think how many people can be killed by just a tiny bit of anthrax. And think about how it's not just a question of whether Saddam Hussein might put them on a Scud missile—an anthrax head—and send it to some city of people he wanted to destroy. Think about all the terrorists and drug runners and other bad actors that could just parade through Baghdad to pick up their stores if we don't take the strongest possible action. 
I far prefer the United Nations; I far prefer the inspectors. I have been far from triggerhappy on this thing. But if they really believe that there are no circumstances under which we would act alone, they are sadly mistaken. 
And that is not a threat. I have shown that I do not relish this sort of thing. Every time it's discussed around here—I said, you know, one of the great luxuries of being the world's only superpower for a while—and it won't last forever, probably, but for a while—is that there is always time enough to kill. And therefore, we have a moral responsibility to show restraint and to seek partnerships and alliances. And I've done that. 
But I don't want to have to explain to my grandchildren why we took a powder on what we think is a very serious biological and chemical weapons program, potentially, by a country that has already used chemical weapons on the Iranians and on the Kurds, their own people. 
The President. Well, I'm going to stay with my tried and true formulation: I'm notrulingout, or in, any option. I was responding to what you said, that the Iraqi official thought we were just talking because we wouldn't want to discomfit anyone or make them mad. That's not true. This is a serious thing with me. This is a very serious thing. And you imagine the capacity of these tiny amounts of biological agents to cause great harm; it's something we need to get after. 
And I don't understand why they're not for getting after it. What can they possibly get out of this? If he really cared about his people— he's always talking about how bad his people have been hurt by these sanctions—if he really cared about his people he'd open all these sites, let everybody go in and look at them—— 
The President. If he's telling the truth, there's nothing there; and if he's not, he'd get it behind it one way or the other. And we could then— he could say, "Okay, what grounds does the United States have now for stopping the U.N. from lifting the sanctions? I have done everything I've been asked to do." And that would be a hard question for us, even though we've got reservations. We'd have a hard time answering that question. 
The President. Right now—our position is, if he complies with all the United Nations sanctions—the conditions of all U.N. resolutions leading to sanctions, that that's what we want Iraq to do. But what he wants is, he wants to have it both ways. He wants to get the sanctions lifted because he thinks people want to do business with him, and he wants to be able to continue to pursue a weapons program that we think presents a danger to the region and maybe to the world and certainly to our own interests and values. 
So I just want him to think about it again before they wait all this 2 months. I think that's a mistake. I want him to think about it and let these inspectors go back


Interview With Mara Liasson and Robert Siegel of National Public Radio
January 21, 1998

The President. Well, there are no easy choices. If we define good as easy, the answer is no. What is the problem? The problem is the weapons of mass destruction program, chemical and biological weapons, primarily. What is the solution? Letting the UNSCOM inspectors go wherever they want. And that means that Saddam Hussein cannot determine when, where, and who, when it comes to the UNSCOM teams. So now he says that he's going to determine that, and there is not going to be any "when" for a couple of months, during which time he'll be free to move whatever he wants wherever he wants. 
I think that this is a big mistake, and I believe that the United Nations will see it as such, and a real thwarting of its position. And we just have to see where we go from here. 
The President. I don't think there is a linkage, a direct linkage. It may affect the atmospherics, just, you know, the attitude about America. But I think it would be wrong to say there's a direct linkage. 
The main thing is every country in the region and throughout the world has a vested interest in seeing that no one who would either use or sell weapons of mass destruction—especially chemical and biological weapons which could be carried around in small amounts, in little valises—that no one who would use or sell them has a big program of them, which is why the whole United Nations is against the Iraqi program. They need to think long and hard, these countries that have been a little squeamish about being firm, whether or not it's possible that they could be the victims of this, if not directly from Iraq, from some group or another that Iraq sells to in the future. 
So I think we need to be firm, and I'm going to do my best to keep rallying support and keep working ahead. I prefer the inspections. I prefer the diplomatic pressure. I have not been triggerhappy on this; some here in our country think that we should have acted before. But I don't think we can ruleout any option


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 27, 1998

Together, we must confront the new hazards of chemical and biological weapons and the outlaw states, terrorists, and organized criminals seeking to acquire them. Saddam Hussein has spent the better part of this decade and much of his nation's wealth not on providing for the Iraqi people but on developing nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them. The United Nations weapons inspectors have done a truly remarkable job finding and destroying more of Iraq's arsenal than was destroyed during the entire Gulf war. Now Saddam Hussein wants to stop them from completing their mission. 
I know I speak for everyone in this chamber, Republicans and Democrats, when I say to Saddam Hussein, "You cannot defy the will of the world," and when I say to him, "You have used weapons of mass destruction before. We are determined to deny you the capacity to use them again.



Videotaped Remarks on Id al-Fítr
January 29, 1998

Today our sympathies are with the people of Algeria and Afghanistan, who have endured too much suffering, and we pray that a time of healing will soon come for them. We are also deeply concerned by the hardships that afflict the people of Iraq, and we will continue working within the United Nations so that they receive the food and medicine they need


Remarks Announcing the High Hopes for College Initiative
February 4, 1998

Since this is my only public appearance of the day, before I begin it is important, I think, to say a few words about the situation in Iraq. Later today, Secretary Albright is going to report to me about her intensive week of meetings with our friends in the Persian Gulf, Europe, and Russia. I'm encouraged by the strong consensus she found that Iraq must fulfill all the United Nations Security Council resolutions and that it must allow international weapons inspectors full and unfettered access to all suspect sites. All of us would prefer a genuine diplomatic solution. I want to reiterate that to every single American. All of us would prefer a genuine diplomatic solution. 
The best way to stop Saddam from building nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons is simply to get the international inspectors back to work with no restraints. Keep in mind, they have done a marvelous job. They have uncovered more weapons potential and weapons stores than were destroyed in the entire Gulf war. But I will say again, one way or the other, we are determined to deny Iraq the capacity to develop weapons of mass destruction and the missiles to deliver them. That is our bottom line. [Applause] Thank you



Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom and an Exchange With Reporters
February 5, 1998

The President. Sorry about the rain, guys. Let me just say, to start out, the reason we're kind of hanging around like this is we're about to go into the back dining room there so we can have a working lunch. And I'm looking forward to this. We're going to have 2 good days, and we have a lot to discuss, not only Iraq, which everyone knows about, and Ireland but also the plans that we're making together, or at least in common, for our countries domestically and a lot of other issues that will affect both the people of Great Britain and the people of the United States. This is going to be a good meeting

The President. Well, I would make two—first of all—and I believe that the Prime Minister has also made this point—what is the cause of the present standoff? It is the suspension of the inspections by the United Nations inspectors and the restrictions on where they can inspect. Our interest is in preventing Saddam Hussein from building biological, chemical, nuclear weapons capability, the missiles to deliver such weapons. That is our interest. That's where the authority from the United Nations resolutions rests. That's the first thing. 
Now, the second thing, as a practical matter we can pursue that interest with available options. Would the Iraqi people be better off if there were a change in leadership? I certainly think they would be. But that is not what the United Nations has authorized us to do; that is not what our immediate interest is about. 
Now, we intend to be very firm on this, and I hope that we will have the world community with us. But what I really hope most of all is that there will be a diplomatic resolution of this, that Saddam Hussein will move away from his present position. 
The President. Well, first of all, there's an Executive order that's been in place for over 20 years on that subject. 
The President. It does. But let's not discuss hypothetically what targets might be there or what we might do. I think it is important that he understand that we are very resolute on the issue of the inspection system. And it's not an American issue. You might want to ask the Prime Minister about that. 
The President. No, no, no. No, no, I was referring to the Executive order, I believe first issued by President Ford, saying that it is against—that political killing, or assassination if you will, is against American foreign policy interests, that we don't do that. But we are very firm in ourresolve. And I was very heartened by the Prime Minister's statement in the White House there about his position. 
The President. Well, I doubt that that would happen. We had a good talk the other day, President Yeltsin and I did. And I know that he very much hopes that a violent confrontation can be avoided. So do I. But in the end, it is up to Saddam Hussein. It is not up to the rest of us. I haven't talked to a single soul who hopes there will be some sort of violent encounter here, not a soul. 
The President. No, no. That's up to Saddam Hussein. I do not want a conflict. I don't believe the Prime Minister wants a conflict. I want a diplomatic resolution of this. But we know from the sheer volume and diversity of material that has been found by the UNSCOM inspectors since 1991 that Saddam Hussein had been aggressively pursuing a weapons of mass destruction program, including biological and chemical weapons, as well as the capability to deliver them by missile. 
Now, what we want is for the U.N. inspectors to be able to do their job, to finish looking at all the sites, and then for monitors to be able to check on a regular basis to make sure there's no rebuilding. It's as simple as that. And if that assurance can be given in reasonable form, that anyone with sound judgment would accept, then nothing is inevitable here. No one wants this. This is about trying to protect our children and their world in the next century from chemical and biological weapons. 
The President. I think, to be fair, the Russians and the French have made strenuous efforts to get Saddam Hussein to comply, to do something reasonable and consistent with the United Nations resolutions. I think they share many of our frustrations. They started from a different place. But we are working very hard. I've had good conversations with President Yeltsin, with President Chirac, and with others around the world. We will continue to work to try to build the strongest consensus we can. 
But let me say that the best solution is to have the weapons inspection program reinserted, have all the sites open, and have some system for regular monitoring. If you look at the astonishing results they have achieved—far more weapons, bigger volume of chemical and biological stocks found and destroyed by these UNSCOM inspectors than was destroyed during the Gulf war—that is the answer. And it's up to Saddam Hussein. No one wants a battle over this. 
But if you think about the potential even a small amount of biological agent—the damage, the number of people that can be killed—if you think about the potential of it and you think about the evidence we have that the Prime Minister mentioned earlier, that he had actually used chemical weapons on the Iranians and on the Kurds, his own people, the United Nations resolution is right, and it needs to be seen through


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom
February 6, 1998

On Iraq, we stand together. Saddam Hussein must know that we are determined to prevent him from threatening his neighbors and the world with weapons of mass destruction. The Prime Minister and I would both prefer a genuine diplomatic solution. 
The best way to stop Saddam from developing an arsenal of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them is to get the inspectors back to work with full and free access to all relevant sites. But let me be clear: If Saddam does not comply with the unanimous will of the international community, we must be preparedtoact, and we are.
The President. Well, you asked about five questions there in one. Let me try to unpack it. First of all, the most important thing, the best thing that could be done, what we hope will happen, is that there will be a diplomatic solution to this which will result in the inspection teams from the United Nations being able to return and have unfettered access to the appropriate sites, because—the Prime Minister I think put out a paper just a couple of days ago pointing out the incredible work that's been done by the inspection teams. That's the best thing. 
Now, whether there is a diplomatic solution or not is entirely up to Saddam Hussein. If he decides that he wants to continue to have the freedom to rebuild his weapons program, then I believe that the clear mandate for the world community, based on not only the resolutions of the United Nations but the danger this would present to the interest and values of the United States, the people of Great Britain, the people of the region, is to do what we can to weaken his ability to develop those weapons of mass destruction and visit them on his neighbors. 
You know I never discuss operational plans. I wouldn't do that. I think the important thing is that you know that I don't want this. Nobody wants this. We want a diplomatic solution. It's up to him. 
The second thing I would say is, the Secretary of State has been working very hard in the last several days, has traveled, as you know, widely. I have been on the phone a lot. I believe there is more agreement than at first it appears about the necessity to push this thing through to the end. 
And I will continue to talk with President Yeltsin and President Chirac and others, but consider the alternative. After all, this man is the only repeat offender around with chemical weapons. He used them on his own people. He used them on the Iranians. And I believe it's a very serious thing. And I think that the American people will understand that. 
The President. I don't understand what chain of circumstances would lead to that development. I don't believe that will happen
The President. Well, there have been many thoughtful public pieces—a lot of very thoughtful articles which have been written about the limits, as well as the possibilities, of any kind of military action. I think the precise question should be—that I should have to ask and answer—is could any military action, if all else fails, substantially reduce or delay Saddam Hussein's capacity to develop weapons of mass destruction and to deliver them on his neighbors. The answer to that, I am convinced, is yes. I am convinced there is a yes answer there. 
But you have to understand that those are the criteria for me. I've told you before, I don't believe we need to refight the Gulf war. It's history. It happened. That's the way it is. I don't believe we need to get into a direct war with Iraq over the leadership of the country. Do I think the country would be better served if it had a different leader? Of course I do. That's not the issue. 
The issue is that very sharp question, if the inspection regime is dead and therefore we cannot continue to make progress on getting the stuff out of there in the first place, and then— keep in mind there are two things about this regime. There's the progress on getting the stuff out of there in the first place, and then there is the monitoring system, which enables people on a regular basis to go back to high-probability sites to make sure nothing is happening to rebuild it. 
So if that is dead, is there an option which would permit us to reduce and/or delay his capacity to bring those weapons up and to deliver them? I think the answer to that is yes, there is an option that would permit that.


The President's Radio Address
February 7, 1998
President Clinton. Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister. On Iraq, as on so many issues, the United States and Britain speak with one voice. 
Since the end of the Gulf war, the United Nations inspectors in Iraq have done a remarkable job. They have found and destroyed 38,000 chemical weapons, more than 100,000 gallons of the agents used in those weapons, 48 missiles, 30 warheads specially fitted for chemical and biological weapons, and a large plant for producing deadly biological agents on a massive scale. 
But their job is not yet done. Iraq continues to conceal chemical and biological weapons and missiles that can deliver them. And Iraq has the capacity to quickly restart production of these weapons. 
The United States and Britain are determined to prevent Saddam Hussein from threatening the world with weapons of mass destruction again. Now, the best way to do that is to get the inspectors back on the job, with full and free access to all the sites, so they can root out whatever else needs to be destroyed and then continue to monitor suspect sites. It's up to Saddam to make that happen. If he doesn't, we must be—and we are—preparedtoact. As we speak, the British aircraft carrier Invincible is patrolling the waters of the Persian Gulf with America's 5th Fleet. United with our allies abroad, we are also united here at home. I thank the many Republicans and Democrats who have expressed strong support for our stand against this menace to global security. No one should doubt ourresolve


Remarks at the Swearing-In Ceremony for David Satcher as Surgeon General and Assistant Secretary for Health and an Exchange With Reporters
February 13, 1998

Let me say that's a very important question because of the reports of the meeting. I have talked at some length with President Yeltsin about this matter. This is a difficult thing for the Russians because they have long had—going back decades—a relationship with the nation of Iraq that long predates Saddam Hussein. 
The Russians agree with us that they are not in compliance with the United Nations resolutions. They agree with us that they must let the inspectors go back to work, do their job, open the sites. They want a diplomatic solution; I want a diplomatic solution. I have bent over backwards for months now to try to achieve a diplomatic solution. I am still working with the Russians, the French, the United Nations, anybody, to try to find a diplomatic solution. 
The difference here is that I simply do not believe it is acceptable to permit Iraq to walkaway from its obligations, because what we want to do is to significantly diminish the capacity of the Iraqis to reconstitute, to develop, to deploy their weapons of mass destruction, and to threaten their neighbors. That is the difference. We don't believe it is acceptable, if diplomacy fails, to walkaway. 
And our relationship with Russia is very important to us. My relationship with President Yeltsin has been very productive, and I believe we have advanced the cause of world peace in substantial ways and advanced our future partnership. But I don't think you can have a United Nations set of resolutions about something this important to the future of the world and simply walkaway if diplomacy fails. And so, that's the rub. But we're going to keep working with the Russians and with everybody else. We're trying to find a diplomatic solution. And I hope that whatever happens, that our relationships with Russia will continue to be productive and constructive and strong because that's very important to the future of our people. 
The President. I don't believe—nyet is not "no" for the United States under these circumstances. 
The President. Well, what—we are simply doing what we always do under circumstances like this. We're taking the necessarysteps that you would expect the United States to take. But I will say again, if there is military action over this matter in Iraq, it will be Saddam Hussein's decision, not mine. It's up to him to make that decision. And I hope and I pray that he will permit qualified, honest, nonpolitical, technically competent inspectors to have access to those sites which have been forbidden and then to permit the monitoring system to go. 
Just look at the volume—look at the sheer volume of stocks and weapons in the chemical and biological area. Look at the nuclear work that's been done since the end of the Gulf war. The inspection system works. It has made the world safer. If he would let that inspection system be completed and accept the offer of the international community, which the United States strongly supports, to sell more oil and have more funds for food and medicine and for reconstituting the basic, fundamental necessities of human life in this country, we would be well on the way to resolving this. 
This is not a complicated thing. A country like Iraq can be a great country and succeed without having a chemical and biological weapons program and the means to visit those weapons on their neighbors. And this is a decision for him to make. I think it is a no-brainer in terms of what's right for the people, the children, and the future of Iraq. But the rest of us have to worry about the children and the people and the future of all the people that are around Iraq or might someday find their way in harm's way if those weapons of chemical and biological destruction are more widely disseminated.


Remarks at the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia
February 17, 1998

I have just received a very fine briefing from our military leadership on the status of our forces in the Persian Gulf. Before I left the Pentagon I wanted to talk to you and all those whom you represent, the men and women of our military. You, your friends, and your colleagues are on the frontlines of this crisis in Iraq. I want you and I want the American people to hear directly from me what is at stake for America in the Persian Gulf; what we are doing to protect the peace, the security, the freedom we cherish; why we have taken the position we have taken

There is no more clear example of this threat than Saddam Hussein's Iraq. His regime threatens the safety of his people, the stability of his region, and the security of all the rest of us. 
I want the American people to understand, first, the past: How did this crisis come about? And I want them to understand what we must do to protect the national interest and, indeed, the interest of all freedom-loving people in the world. 
Remember, as a condition of the cease-fire after the Gulf war, the United Nations demanded—not the United States, the United Nations demanded—and Saddam Hussein agreed to declare within 15 days—this is way back in 1991—within 15 days his nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them, to make a total declaration. That's what he promised to do. 
The United Nations set up a special commission of highly trained international experts, called UNSCOM, to make sure that Iraq made good on that commitment. We had every good reason to insist that Iraq disarm. Saddam had built up a terrible arsenal, and he had used it, not once but many times. In a decade-long war with Iran, he used chemical weapons against combatants, against civilians, against a foreign adversary, and even against his own people. And during the Gulf war, Saddam launched Scuds against Saudi Arabia, Israel, and Bahrain. 
Now, instead of playing by the very rules he agreed to at the end of the Gulf war, Saddam has spent the better part of the past decade trying to cheat on this solemn commitment. Consider just some of the facts. Iraq repeatedly made false declarations about the weapons that it had left in its possession after the Gulf war. When UNSCOM would then uncover evidence that gave lie to those declarations, Iraq would simply amend the reports. For example, Iraq revised its nuclear declarations 4 times within just 14 months, and it has submitted six different biological warfare declarations, each of which has been rejected by UNSCOM. 
In 1995, Hussein Kamel, Saddam's son-in-law and the chief organizer of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program, defected to Jordan. He revealed that Iraq was continuing to conceal weapons and missiles and the capacity to build many more. Then and only then did Iraq admit to developing numbers of weapons in significant quantities and weapons stocks. Previously it had vehemently denied the very thing it just simply admitted once Saddam Hussein's son-in-law defected to Jordan and told the truth. 
Now, listen to this. What did it admit? It admitted, among other things, an offensive biological warfare capability, notably 5,000 gallons of botulinum, which causes botulism; 2,000 gallons of anthrax; 25 biological-filled Scud warheads; and 157 aerial bombs. And I might say, UNSCOM inspectors believe that Iraq has actually greatly understated its production. As if we needed further confirmation, you all know what happened to his son-in-law when he made the untimely decision to go back to Iraq. 
Next, throughout this entire process, Iraqi agents have undermined and undercut UNSCOM. They've harassed the inspectors, lied to them, disabled monitoring cameras, literally spirited evidence out of the back doors of suspect facilities as inspectors walked through the front door, and our people were there observing it and have the pictures to prove it. 
Despite Iraq's deceptions UNSCOM has, nevertheless, done a remarkable job. Its inspectors, the eyes and ears of the civilized world, have uncovered and destroyed more weapons of mass destruction capacity than was destroyed during the Gulf war. This includes nearly 40,000 chemical weapons, more than 100,000 gallons of chemical weapons agents, 48 operational missiles, 30 warheads specifically fitted for chemical and biological weapons, and a massive biological weapons facility at Al Hakam equipped to produce anthrax and other deadly agents. 
Over the past few months, as they have come closer and closer to rooting out Iraq's remaining nuclear capacity, Saddam has undertaken yet another gambit to thwart their ambition by imposing debilitating conditions on the inspectors and declaring key sites which have still not been inspected off limits, including, I might add, one palace in Baghdad more than 2,600 acres large. By comparison—when you hear all this business about "Presidential sites reflect our sovereignty; why do you want to come into a residence?"— the White House complex is 18 acres, so you'll have some feel for this. One of these Presidential sites is about the size of Washington, DC. That's about—how many acres did you tell me it was—40,000 acres. We're not talking about a few rooms here with delicate personal matters involved. 
It is obvious that there is an attempt here, based on the whole history of this operation since 1991, to protect whatever remains of his capacity to produce weapons of mass destruction, the missiles to deliver them, and the feedstocks necessary to produce them. The UNSCOM inspectors believe that Iraq still has stockpiles of chemical and biological munitions, a small force of Scud-type missiles, and the capacity to restart quickly its production program and build many, many more weapons. 
Now, against that background, let us remember the past, here. It is against that background that we have repeatedly and unambiguously made clear our preference for a diplomatic solution. The inspection system works. The inspection system has worked in the face of lies, stonewalling, obstacle after obstacle after obstacle. The people who have done that work deserve the thanks of civilized people throughout the world. It has worked. 
That is all we want. And if we can find a diplomatic way to do what has to be done, to do what he promised to do at the end of the Gulf war, to do what should have been done within 15 days—within 15 days of the agreement at the end of the Gulf war—if we can find a diplomatic way to do that, that is by far our preference. But to be a genuine solution and not simply one that glosses over the remaining problem, a diplomatic solution must include or meet a clear, immutable, reasonable, simple standard: Iraq must agree, and soon, to free, full, unfettered access to these sites, anywhere in the country. There can be no dilution or diminishment of the integrity of the inspection system that UNSCOM has put in place. 
Now, those terms are nothing more or less than the essence of what he agreed to at the end of the Gulf war. The Security Council many times since has reiterated this standard. If he accepts them, force will not be necessary. If he refuses or continues to evade his obligation through more tactics of delay and deception, he, and he alone, will be to blame for the consequences. 
I ask all of you to remember the record here: what he promised to do within 15 days of the end of the Gulf war, what he repeatedly refused to do, what we found out in '95, what the inspectors have done against all odds. 
We have no business agreeing to any resolution of this that does not include free, unfettered access to the remaining sites by people who have integrity and proven competence in the inspection business. That should be our standard. That's what UNSCOM has done, and that's why I have been fighting for it so hard. That's why the United States should insist upon it. 
Now let's imagine the future. What if he fails to comply and we fail to act, or we take some ambiguous third route which gives him yet more opportunities to develop this program of weapons of mass destruction and continue to press for the release of the sanctions and continue to ignore the solemn commitments that he made? Well, he will conclude that the international community has lost its will. He will then conclude that he can go right on and do more to rebuild an arsenal of devastating destruction. And some day, some way, I guarantee you, he'll use the arsenal. And I think every one of you who has really worked on this for any length of time believes that, too. 
Now, we have spent several weeks building up our forces in the Gulf and building a coalition of like-minded nations. Our force posture would not be possible without the support of Saudi Arabia, of Kuwait, Bahrain, the GCC States, and Turkey. Other friends and allies have agreed to provide forces, bases, or logistical support, including the United Kingdom, Germany, Spain and Portugal, Denmark and The Netherlands, Hungary and Poland and the Czech Republic, Argentina, Iceland, Australia, New Zealand, and our friends and neighbors in Canada. That list is growing, not because anyone wants military action but because there are people in this world who believe the United Nations resolution should mean something, because they understand what UNSCOM has achieved, because they remember the past, and because they can imagine what the future will be, depending on what we do now. 
If Saddam rejects peace and we have to use force, our purpose is clear: We want to seriously diminish the threat posed by Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program. We want to seriously reduce his capacity to threaten his neighbors. I am quite confident from the briefing I have just received from our military leaders that we can achieve the objectives and secure our vital strategic interests. 
Let me be clear: A military operation cannot destroy all the weapons of mass destruction capacity. But it can and will leave him significantly worse off than he is now in terms of the ability to threaten the world with these weapons or to attack his neighbors. And he will know that the international community continues to have the will to act if and when he threatens again. 
Following any strike, we will carefully monitor Iraq's activities with all the means at our disposal. If he seeks to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction, we will be prepared to strike him again. The economic sanctions will remain in place until Saddam complies fully with all U.N. resolutions. 
Consider this: Already these sanctions have denied him $110 billion. Imagine how much stronger his armed forces would be today, how many more weapons of mass destruction operations he would have hidden around the country if he had been able to spend even a small fraction of that amount for a military rebuilding. 
We will continue to enforce a no-fly zone from the southern suburbs of Baghdad to the Kuwait border and in northern Iraq, making it more difficult for Iraq to walk over Kuwait again or threaten the Kurds in the north. 
Now, let me say to all of you here, as all of you know, the weightiest decision any President ever has to make is to send our troops into harm's way. And force can never be the first answer. But sometimes it's the only answer. 
You are the best prepared, best equipped, best trained fighting force in the world. And should it prove necessary for me to exercise the option of force, your commanders will do everything they can to protect the safety of all the men and women under their command. No military action, however, is risk-free. I know that the people we may callupon in uniform are ready. The American people have to be ready as well. 
Dealing with Saddam Hussein requires constant vigilance. We have seen that constant vigilance pays off, but it requires constant vigilance. Since the Gulf war we have pushed back every time Saddam has posed a threat. When Baghdad plotted to assassinate former President Bush, we struck hard at Iraq's intelligence headquarters. When Saddam threatened another invasion by massing his troops in Kuwait, along the Kuwaiti border in 1994, we immediately deployed our troops, our ships, our planes, and Saddam backed down. When Saddam forcefully occupied Irbil in northern Iraq, we broadened our control over Iraq's skies by extending the no-fly zone. 
But there is no better example, again I say, than the U.N. weapons inspections system itself. Yes, he has tried to thwart it in every conceivable way. But the discipline, determination, the year-in, year-out effort of these weapons inspectors is doing the job. And we seek to finish the job. 
Let there be no doubt, we are preparedtoact. But Saddam Hussein could end this crisis tomorrow, simply by letting the weapons inspectors complete their mission. He made a solemn commitment to the international community to do that and to give up his weapons of mass destruction a long time ago, now. One way or the other, we are determined to see that he makes good on his own promise. 
Saddam Hussein's Iraq reminds us of what we learned in the 20th century and warns us of what we must know about the 21st. In this century we learned through harsh experience that the only answer to aggression and illegal behavior is firmness, determination, and, when necessary, action. In the next century, the community of nations may see more and more the very kind of threat Iraq poses now: a rogue state with weapons of mass destruction, ready to use them or provide them to terrorists, drug traffickers, or organized criminals, who travel the world among us unnoticed. 
If we fail to respond today, Saddam and all those who would follow in his footsteps will be emboldened tomorrow by the knowledge that they can act with impunity, even in the face of a clear message from the United Nations Security Council and clear evidence of a weapons of mass destruction program. But if we act as one, we can safeguard our interests and send a clear message to every would-be tyrant and terrorist that the international community does have the wisdom and the will and the way to protect peace and security in a new era. 
That is the future I ask you all to imagine. That is the future I ask our allies to imagine. If we look at the past and imagine that future, we will act as one together. And we still have, God willing, a chance to find a diplomatic resolution to this and, if not, God willing, a chance to do theright thing for our children and grandchildren

Remarks at a Reception for Representative James P. Moran
February 18, 1998

One of the things that I want you to understand—I have not much to add at this moment to what I have already said yesterday in my speech at the Pentagon about the situation in Iraq, but I want you to think about this. There will never be a time as long as we're on this Earth when there won't be people who seek absolute, arbitrary, abusive power. This country was established by people who were fleeing absolute, arbitrary, abusive power. That's how we all got started. And we have been jealous about that from the beginning.


Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Dinner
February 18, 1998

So I want you to keep going out there and talking to people about America in the 21st century. If you think about the present difficulty we're having with Iraq—I don't want to talk about it in any great detail tonight, but I want to say it has—it is not a replay of what happened in 1991. It is a forerunner of what could or could not happen in 2010, in 2020, in 2030


Remarks on the Situation in Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
February 19, 1998

The President. Good morning. I have just had a very good conversation with the President of France, Jacques Chirac. We agreed that U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's mission to Baghdad is a critical opportunity to achieve the outcome that all of us would prefer, a peaceful and principled end to this crisis. 
The Secretary-General is backed by the unambiguous position of the Security Council. Saddam Hussein must give the weapons inspectors full, free, unfettered access to all suspected sites anywhere in Iraq. That is the clear standard which Saddam himself agreed to at the end of the Gulf war and that the Security Council has reiterated on many occasions since. He simply must adhere to that standard. 
Let me also say that I have asked Vice President Gore to postpone his planned trip to South Africa. In the coming days I want my full national security team on hand to take part in our deliberations and decisions on this vitally important issue. 
We hope the Secretary-General's mission will succeed. But let me be clear: If diplomacy fails, we must be—and we are—preparedtoact. The choice is Saddam Hussein's. We hope he will accept the mandate of the world community. He has, after all, agreed to it already, years ago. If not, he must bear the responsibility for the consequences. 
The President. Well, I thought it was a good old-fashioned American debate. But I would say, I was, first of all, very proud of the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and Mr. Berger. I thought they answered the questions well. And I believe strongly that most Americans support our policy. They support ourresolve. 
I think an overwhelming majority of Americans also want a peaceful resolution of this, but if it's necessary for us to act, I believe America will do what it always does. I believe it will unite, just as we did in 1991. I believe it will unite behind taking the necessaryaction. 
The President. Not if he understands the first thing about America. 
The President. I've made no decision about a deadline. 
The President. Well, if further action becomes necessary, I will obviously speak directly to the American people about it. 
The President. I believe that the speech I gave at the Pentagon was quite clear about that. We want to significantly reduce his capacity to produce chemical and biological weapons and his capacity to delivery them and to visit them on his people, his neighbors, and people throughout the world. I believe the more the American people learn about the dangers of chemical and biological warfare, the kinds of problems they can present to us now and in the future, the stiffer their resolve will be. 
And so I feel that time is on our side. And I believe that 10 years from now, not in the heat of this moment, 15 years from now, when people look back at this time, they will want to look back at a period when those of us in positions of responsibility fulfilled our responsibility by trying to rid the world of this danger.


Videotaped Remarks on Expansion of United Nations Security Council Resolution 986 Concerning Iraq
February 20, 1998

No people have suffered more at the hands of Saddam Hussein than the Iraqi people themselves. I have been very moved, as so many others around the world have been, by their plight. Because of Saddam Hussein's failure to comply with U.N. resolutions, the sanctions imposed by the U.N. at the end of the Gulf war to stop him from rebuilding his military might are still in place. 
As a result, the people of Iraq have suffered. They are the victims of Saddam's refusal to comply with the resolutions he promised to honor. The United States strongly supports the U.N. Secretary General's recommendation to more than double the amount of oil Iraq can sell in exchange for food, medicine, and other humanitarian supplies. We will work hard to make sure those funds are used to help the ordinary people of Iraq. 
Since the Gulf war, our policy has been aimed at preventing Saddam from threatening his region or the world. We have no quarrel with the Iraqi people who are heirs to a proud civilization and who have suffered for so many years under Saddam's rule. 
From the beginning, the international sanctions that are aimed at denying Saddam Hussein the funds to rebuild his military machine have permitted food and medicine into Iraq. The United States has led the way in trying to make sure Iraq had the resources to pay for them. 
In 1991, with our leadership, the U.N. Security Council encouraged Iraq to sell oil to pay for these critical humanitarian supplies. Saddam Hussein rejected that offer for 4 years, choosing instead to let his people suffer. What resources he had went not to caring for his people but to strengthening his army, hiding his weapons of mass destruction, and building lavish palaces for his regime. 
In 1995 America led a new effort to aid the Iraqi people. After refusing the proposal for a year, Saddam finally accepted U.N. Security Council Resolution 986, which permits the sale of oil for food. Then he engaged in delay and bureaucratic wrangling for yet another year before allowing the resolution to take effect. 
Perhaps worst of all, Saddam deliberately and repeatedly delayed the pumping of oil, which held up shipments of food and medicine to the Iraqi population. Even so, the international community has managed to deliver to the Iraqi people more than 3 million tons of food. 
Just as Saddam deprives his people of relief from abroad, he represses them at home, brutally putting down the uprisings of the Iraqi people after the Gulf war, attacking Irbil in 1996, and draining the marshes of Southern Iraq. 
Saddam's priorities are painfully clear: not caring for his citizens but building weapons of mass destruction and using them—using them not once but repeatedly in the terrible war Iraq fought with Iran, and not only against combatants but against civilians, and not only against a foreign adversary but against his own people. And he's targeted Scud missiles against fellow Arabs and Muslims in Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain. 
Now, he is trying to rid Iraq of the international inspectors who have done such a remarkable job in finding and destroying his hidden weapons—weapons he himself promised in 1991 to report and help destroy. If Saddam is allowed to rebuild his arsenal unchecked, none of the region's children will be safe. 
America is working very hard to find a diplomatic solution to this crisis Saddam has created. I have sent my Secretary of State, my Defense Secretary, and my Ambassador to the United Nations literally around the world to work with our friends and allies. If there is a way to resolve this peacefully, we will pursue it to the very end. 
But from Europe to the Persian Gulf, all agree on the bottom line: Saddam must allow the U.N. weapons inspectors to complete their mission with full and free access to any site they suspect may be hiding material or information related to Iraqi weapons of mass destruction programs. That is what Saddam agreed to as a condition for ending the Gulf war way back in 1991. 
Nobody wants to use force. But if Saddam refuses to keep his commitments to the international community, we must be prepared to deal directly with the threat these weapons pose to the Iraqi people, to Iraq's neighbors, and to the rest of the world. Either Saddam acts, or we will have to. 
Saddam himself understands that the international community places a higher value on the lives of the Iraqi people than he does. That is why he uses innocent women and children as human shields, risking what we care about— human lives—to protect what he cares about— his weapons. If force proves necessary to resolve this crisis, we will do everything we can to prevent innocent people from getting hurt. But make no mistake: Saddam Hussein must bear full responsibility for every casualty that results. 
To all our Arab and Muslim friends, let me say America wants to see a future of security, prosperity, and peace for all the people of the Middle East. We want to see the Iraqi people free of the constant warfare and repression that have been the hallmark of Saddam's regime. We want to see them living in a nation that uses its wealth not to strengthen its arsenal but to care for its citizens and give its children a brighter future. That is what we'll keep working for and what the people of Iraq deserve


Remarks at the National Governors' Association Meeting
February 23, 1998

I'd also like to say I'm sorry we're starting a little late, but I've been working on the situation in Iraq. The Vice President and I met with National Security Adviser Berger this morning. Last night, just before our dinner, I spoke with the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, and I have called Prime Minister Blair this morning; we had a long talk about the situation. I still have to talk to President Yeltsin and President Chirac, and I may have to leave the meeting and then come back. But that's all I have to say now, but I'm sorry we're starting a little late.


Remarks on United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan's Mission to Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
February 23, 1998

The President. Good afternoon. Let me say first that I welcome U.N. Secretary-General Annan's mission to Baghdad. I thank him and his team for their hard work on behalf of the international community. I also want to commend each and every one of our men and women in uniform and our coalition partners for their steadfastness. Once again, we have seen that diplomacy must be backed by strength and resolve. 
The Government of Iraq has made a written commitment to provide immediate, unrestricted, unconditional access for the UNSCOM weapons inspectors to all suspect sites in Iraq, as called for by the United Nations Security Council resolutions. If fully implemented—and that is the big "if"—this commitment will allow UNSCOM to fulfill its mission: first, to find and destroy all of Iraq's chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons; second, to find and destroy the missiles to deliver those weapons; and third, to institute a system for long-term monitoring to make sure Iraq does not build more. 
The Secretary-General has made clear that Iraq's commitment applies to all sites anywhere in the country, including eight so-called presidential sites, which are among the areas to which the weapons inspectors had previously been denied access. 
Senior diplomats appointed by the Secretary-General will accompany the UNSCOM experts as they inspect these sites, with repeat visits and no deadlines to complete their work. And Iraq has committed that all other areas, facilities, equipment, records, and means of transportation shall be open to UNSCOM under existing procedures. Again, this includes sites that were previously closed. 
There are issues that still need to be clarified to our satisfaction and details that need to be spelled out. We will hear from the Secretary-General tomorrow on these questions, and we will work with him and with UNSCOM to make sure the inspections are rigorous and professional. What really matters is Iraq's compliance, not its stated commitments; not what Iraq says, but what it does. In the days and weeks ahead, UNSCOM must test and verify. 
After two crises in the last 4 months, Iraq's failure to allow UNSCOM to do its job would be a serious, serious matter. If Iraq fails to comply this time to provide immediate, unrestricted, unconditional access to the weapons inspectors, there will be serious consequences. 
I have ordered our military to remain in the Persian Gulf. Our soldiers, our ships, our planes will stay there in force until we are satisfied that Iran is complying—Iraq is complying with its commitments. 
If the inspectors are allowed to inspect where and when they want, then they are the most effective tool we have to monitor Iraq's compliance with the commitment it made at the end of the Gulf war to give up all of its biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons, the missiles to deliver them, and the capacity to rebuild its arsenal. 
I hope today's agreement will prove to be the step forward we have been looking for. But the proof is in the testing. The United States remains resolved and ready to secure, by whatevermeansnecessary, Iraq's full compliance with its commitment to destroy its weapons of mass destruction. 
The President. Well, I've already said I don't know whether we'll be in a position of breach by Iraq within a year. All I said is that I think it is now clear, based on my conversations with Prime Minister Blair, President Chirac, President Yeltsin, and what we in our own team believe, no one seriously believes that there can be a breach of this agreement by Iraq without serious consequences. 
But I will say, this is the first time—at least since 1991—that Iraq has made a commitment to unconditional, open, unfettered access to all the sites, not only these presidential sites there's been so much talk about but also some other so-called sensitive sites that have been off limits. 
So if the inspection system is allowed to go forward—we know from the record that the UNSCOM inspectors have compiled in the last 7 years that the system works. And if we can find a peaceful means for the system to work to secure the safety of the people in the region, the neighbors of Iraq and others that might be menaced in the future by its weapons of mass destruction, that is what we have been seeking. 
The President. I believe if it does not keep its word this time, everyone would understand that then the United States and hopefully all of our allies would have the unilateral right to respond at a time, place, and manner of our own choosing. And I think that's enough for me to say about that at this time. 
The President. First of all, that is true. But I've also said before that when the UNSCOM inspectors have been allowed to do their job, even when there's been some cat-and-mouse games over there, they have succeeded beyond anyone's expectations. You just have to look at the volume of stuff they've uncovered and destroyed to know that. Therefore, this should not be a question of trust. First, we need clarity. We need to clarify some of the remaining questions about the agreement to our satisfaction. Clarity is important. And in fairness, all parties, even Saddam Hussein, all the parties are entitled to that—clarity. Then we need to test the agreement and verify that the commitments which are made in writing are kept in fact. So trust should not have to be an issue here. If you have clarity, then you can verify. 
So over the next 2 days we have a very— all Americans should have a positive reaction to the fact that we finally have a commitment to open all these sites and to let the inspectors finish their job. We need clarity; we need verification; and I intend to keep our forces at high levels of preparation in the Gulf in the near-term to see what happens in terms of honoring these obligations. 
The President. Well, since 1991, our strategy has been to keep the sanctions on, keep Iraq from rebuilding its military might and threatening its neighbors, but to pursue this inspection system to end what is the biggest threat both to its neighbors and to others by indirection, which is the chemical, the biological, and the nuclear weapons program. That has been our strategy all along. Whether that should continue to be our strategy depends in no small measure, I believe, on whether this agreement is honored. 
The President. Well, I think he has admitted that he has to honor commitments he made back in '91. You know, I think that our tough response was essential to getting him to admit that. The Secretary-General has conducted a hard mission. I am satisfied that he has done the best he can. And I am satisfied that we would not have this commitment to open all these spots had not the United States and our allies—and there were lots of them, don't forget—been prepared to go further and to take whateveractions were necessary. 
But the main thing we need to do now is to focus on clarifying the details of the agreement to our satisfaction, then going ahead and testing it and verifying the commitment. I think that is the most useful thing. What we want here is to secure the safety of the people who would be exposed to chemical and biological weapons and to whatever nuclear capacity that he might still have. 
You know, the United States—I think I should point this out, it's not been part of my statement, but the United States—and Ambassador Richardson was there carrying the ball for us—we strongly supported expanding the program under Resolution 986 in the Security Council to let Iraq sell even more oil to go for food, to lift the Iraqi children above the minimum caloric requirement for all growing children in the world, to build 5,000 more schools, to put a lot more medicine into that country, to rebuild the water and sewer systems and the agriculture system. We care a lot about the people of Iraq, and we want them to have a decent life. But we all—we must still be vigilant and steadfast about this regime. 
This is—and I say again, one of you asked me this question—this is not about trusting. First, we need to be clear on what it means, and he needs to be clear on what it means. And then we need to see whether it is enforced. And if it is, fine. If it's not, then the alternative will be a clear course of action to everyone in the world. 
The President. Well, I think it's obvious that I haven't looked for a way out here. What I have looked for is a way forward. The United States, because of our position in the world, is called upon to bring its power to bear when it's important to do so. But we also should have the self-confidence and the conscience to show forbearance as well as strength, and to do what is right. 
The objective is unassailable, and he has agreed to the objective, which is full and free and unfettered access. I have told you—not my critics, I have told you—that there are details in this agreement that still have to be flushed out, and there are provisions in it which require greater clarity, and we have to have those things resolved to our satisfaction in order to go forward. 
But my instinct is, talking to the Secretary-General and talking to our partners, that we can resolve those things to our satisfaction. I'm hoping that we can, but I am not prejudging it. Ambassador Richardson has got his work cut out for him tomorrow, and the rest of our team will be working closely with him. We'll see what we're doing. 
The President. Well, we'll do that at the proper time. The Secretary-General has asked to have the opportunity—and I think he's entitled to it—to present the memorandum of understanding to the Security Council before the rest of us comment on the details. And I think that he is entitled to that. He's worked very hard; he's had very little sleep in the last several days. And I'm going to honor his request to that. 


Remarks to the National Council of Jewish Women
February 24, 1998

This has been a very busy week in Washington, and I think that there are a couple of issues I ought to make a remark or two about before I begin what I came here to visit with you about. First, let me say a few words about Iraq. As you know, yesterday the Government of Iraq agreed to give the United Nations inspectors immediate, unrestricted, and unconditional access to any site they suspect may be hiding weapons of mass destruction or the means to make or deliver them. If fully implemented, this means that, finally, and for the first time in 7 years, all of Iraq will be open to U.N. inspections, including many sites previously declared off limits. This would be an important step forward. 
I'm proud of all of our men and women in uniform in the Gulf. Once again we have seen that diplomacy backed by resolve and strength can have positive results for humanity. We have to be watching very closely now to see not just what Iraq says, but what it does; not just the stated commitments, but the actual compliance. Let there be no doubt, we must remain committed to see that Saddam Hussein does not menace the world with weapons of mass destruction.



Remarks on Signing a Memorandum on Standards To Prevent Drinking and Driving
March 3, 1998

Now, in a few moments I want to ask Ashley's classmates who are here, members of my Cabinet, and the Members of Congress who are here to join me as I sign the Presidential directive on Federal property. But before I do, if you will indulge me, because of the action of the United Nations Security Council with regard to Iraq and because this is the only chance I have to appear before the press and therefore the American people today, I would like to make a brief statement. 
Iraq 
The unanimous vote of the United Nations Security Council last night sends a clear message. Iraq must fulfill without obstruction or delay its commitment to open all of the nation to the international weapons inspectors—anyplace, anytime, without any conditions, deadlines, or excuses. 
All the members of the Security Council agree that failure to do so will result in severest consequences. The Government of Iraq should be under no illusion. The meaning of "severest consequences" is clear. It provides authority to act if Iraq does not turn the commitment it has now made into compliance. 
As the Secretary-General told the Security Council yesterday, Iraq's complete fulfillment of these obligations is the one and only aim of the agreement. No promise of peace and no policy of patience can be without its limits. Iraq's words must be matched by deeds. The world is watching


Remarks at the Time Magazine 75th Anniversary Celebration in New York City
March 3, 1998

America must work to secure this kind of freedom with our allies and friends whenever possible, alone if absolutely necessary. We work today through the United Nations, which FDR helped to create and which he named. I salute Secretary-General Kofi Annan tonight for what he has done. Bearing an unequivocal message from the international community, backed by the credible threat of force, the Secretary-General obtained Iraq's commitment to honor United Nations resolutions on weapons inspection. Now the Security Council clearly and unanimously has supported the agreement. Iraq must match its words and its deeds, its commitment with compliance


Remarks Prior to Discussions With United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and an Exchange With Reporters
March 11, 1998

President Clinton. Let me begin by saying that I'm delighted that the Secretary-General is here. We share a strong commitment to curtailing the threat of weapons of mass destruction in general and to continuing the work in Iraq. And again let me say how pleased I am at the agreement that he worked out with Iraq to continue the inspections, as well as the access which has been provided to the UNSCOM inspectors which was previously denied. All that is encouraging. 
Now, I think we have to remain vigilant. The last 6 days is not the same as the next 6 months, but it's all very hopeful. And the Secretary-General deserves a lot of appreciation from the United States and from all Americans for the work that has been done. 
President Clinton. Well, over the weekend the Secretary-General said he thought that under the resolution there would have to be some consultations before any military force could be taken or used. We believe that the resolution gives us the authority to take whateveractionsarenecessary. But of course, we would consult. It would be unthinkable that we wouldn't do that. We do that all the time anyway. I spent an awful lot of time on the telephone with large numbers of world leaders in the last several weeks as this difficulty has unfolded, and so I'm not sure there is a conflict between our positions. 
President Clinton. I just don't believe it is. The agreement on its own terms is clearly not a sellout. The agreement on its own terms preserves the integrity of the UNSCOM inspections. It does add some diplomats to the inspection process in the Presidential sites, but if the agreement is complied with—and again, I think the Secretary-General did a good job working through these issues over the weekend—then we will be able to do what the United States has always wanted, which is to complete the inspection process. 
Again, let me say—I know I don't need to beat this dead horse, but I think it's worth repeating one more time. I see this issue with Iraq in the larger context of the threat I believe will be presented to the world for the next few decades from biological and chemical and perhaps even, God forbid, small-scale nuclear weapons—a different sort of weapons of mass destruction threat than we have faced in the past. And world leaders simply have to come to grips with the potential that is out there for organized groups—not just nations but terrorist groups, narcotraffickers, international criminals—to make and deploy such weapons for their own purposes, so that this is very important on its own merits. But it's also very important as the first of what I believe will have to be a many, many year effort by all peace-loving people to deal with this issue. 


Remarks on the Observance of International Women's Day
March 11, 1998

Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General for being here. We've had a very good meeting, just before we came over here, to talk about our shared goal of preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction and of securing Iraq's compliance with its obligations under the U.N. Security Council resolutions. 
The Secretary-General deserves the thanks of all Americans for securing the agreement with the Iraqi Government to open all sites for inspection. The commitments made to him, as well as last week's successful U.N. inspections in sites that had previously been closed, are quite significant. They must be carried out. The last 6 days must be replicated in the coming 6 months. And the United States must remain vigilant to see that that occurs




The President's Radio Address
March 14, 1998
The measure would also pay our longstanding debt to the United Nations at a time when that organization continues to play a critical role in forcing Iraq to yield and in supporting peace and progress throughout the world. I don't think any American believes that America shouldn't pay its dues to the U.N.



Exchange With Reporters Following Discussions With Deputy President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa in Cape Town
March 26, 1998

President Clinton. No, but I'm glad that they're inspecting the sites. I think that's a good thing, and it means that so far the agreement is holding. And that's all we ever wanted. We just want to see the U.N. inspectors complete their work. So I'm encouraged.


The President's News Conference
April 30, 1998
The President. Well, those are two very different questions. Let me say, first of all, we are encouraged by the level of compliance so far with the U.N. inspections and by the evidence that has been adduced on the nuclear side that more progress has been made. And I believe we've already issued a statement that we believe that if Baghdad will continue to work with us, that by October the U.N. may well be able to certify that they are actually in compliance on the nuclear side, and they can go from the inspection to the monitoring phase. Keep in mind, even under the agreements, the U.N. resolutions, no matter what is found out in any of these areas, there will still be a monitoring regime there. 
Our position on lifting the sanctions is that the U.N. resolutions have to be complied with completely, and then we'd vote to lift the sanctions. So this is just the nuclear piece. But I am encouraged by that. 
Now, on the question of reducing our military presence in the Gulf, I would wait for a recommendation from the Pentagon with involvement from the State Department and the NSC on that. That is, we have a certain number of carrier groups and a certain number of assets to deploy at sea. They have to be trained; they also need to be deployed in different places for different reasons. So, inevitably, unless we believe there is some reason for it to be there at some point in the future, I would anticipate some reallocation of our resources. But I have not received a recommendation on that yet by the Defense Department




The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Romano Prodi of Italy
May 6, 1998

President Clinton. Well, we have sent—the Eisenhower is sailing on schedule, as you probably know. And there's been some speculation about the timetable there, but I can tell you that I have not—Secretary Cohen has not recommended a final decision to me on this, and I have certainly not made one, and we've done our best to keep all of our options open. 
The main thing I want to reaffirm is our determination to see the United Nations resolutions complied with and the inspection regime continue until it finishes its work. But no final decision has been made on that yet.


Commencement Address at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland
May 22, 1998

Third, we will undertake a concerted effort to prevent the spread and use of biological weapons and to protect our people in the event these terrible weapons are ever unleashed by a rogue state, a terrorist group, or an international criminal organization. Conventional military force will continue to be crucial to curbing weapons of mass destruction. In the confrontation against Iraq, deployment of our Navy and Marine forces has played a key role in helping to convince Saddam Hussein to accept United Nations inspections of his weapons facilities


Remarks in a Roundtable Discussion on the 2000 Census in Houston, Texas
June 2, 1998

The only place I know that probably got a good head count recently—well, you may have seen the press, where they have a much more controlled society, where people don't get to move around on their own, is Iraq, where they shut the whole country down for a day. You remember that? Nobody moves; everybody stays home; kids have to play in front of their house— stay there. That doesn't seem to me to be a practical alternative for us. [Laughter


Remarks at a Reception for Gubernatorial Candidate Lee Fisher in Cleveland
June 3, 1998

One final example: We have a great task in this country today to try to continue to lead the world away from this incredible rash of violence and potential violence rooted in ethnic, racial, and religious hatred. It's the new problem at the end of the cold war. And the prospect that that might get mixed with weapons of mass destruction is what troubles people about the nuclear tests in South Asia. And it's what troubles us when we demanded the inspections in Iraq be complied with, because we don't want to see a country that might foment trouble build up chemical and biological weapons capacity


Remarks on the Nominations of Bill Richardson To Be Secretary of Energy and Richard C. Holbrooke To Be United Nations Ambassador and an Exchange With Reporters
June 18, 1998

He has served the Secretary of State and me by tackling some of the toughest negotiating challenges from the Congo to Zaire to Afghanistan. He helped to rally the international community to speak and act as one in the crisis in Iraq. Today, the international inspectors are back on the job, working to end Iraq's nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons threat, thanks in no small measure to his efforts. He has been a vigorous and articulate proponent of our engagement around the world and the importance of leveraging that engagement by living up to our United Nations obligations


Remarks Prior to a Meeting With the Economic Team and an Exchange With Reporters
June 19, 1998

And once in a while it works when you've got—in certain specific cases—I mean, the trade sanctions worked in South Africa after many years because everybody supported them. And they helped us in Bosnia because everybody supported them. And they helped us in Iraq because it had the U.N. behind it. But here's a case where I think we've got far more to gain with a constructive engagement with China. It's a very great country with enormous potential, that has cooperated with us in many areas to make the world a safer place in the last few years. And we have now found a forum and a way in which we can honorably express our disagreements and believe we can make some progress on. This is the last time to be making a U-turn and going back to a policy we know won't work when we've got a policy that is working. We need patience and discipline and determination to stay with what we're doing


Interview With CBS News, Cox Newspapers, and McClatchy Newspapers
June 19, 1998

The President. Yes. Let me just say, I think sanctions can be helpful from time to time. They're most helpful, clearly, when the world community agrees. I think that the sanctions on South Africa were helpful in bringing an end to apartheid. I think the sanctions on Serbia were helpful in bringing about an agreement in Bosnia. I think the sanctions on Iraq have been helpful in preventing Saddam Hussein from rebuilding the military that could dominate its neighbors and getting back into weapons of mass destruction. So when you've got uniform sanctions, they can be helpful. Sometimes they can be effective even if the United States is doing them, if it covers a situation we can dominate economically. Sometimes they're helpful just as a gesture of disapproval


Remarks on Signing the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform Act of 1998 and an Exchange With Reporters
June 23, 1998

The President. You asked me about the report about the U.N. weapons inspectors in Iraq, that there were traces of VX found in a missile head? 
Well, it proves that the United—let me just say, it proves that the United States has been accurate and correct in our insistence all along that we support the U.N. inspections in Iraq. And it proves that our decision to oppose relaxing the sanctions until all the U.N. resolutions have been complied with is an accurate one. 
Mr. Butler is doing his job, and we need to wait until we hear the report. There is a news report to this effect, but it just proves that—you know, our job in the world is to try to reduce the danger that our people and others in the world face from nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. And sometimes we have to do it even when our friends and neighbors don't think it is as important as we do. It is very important. 
If this report is true, it will just show that our insistence over these last many years on the U.N. inspection system is theright thing to do for the safety of America and the safety of the rest of the world. And we'll stay with the position we've always had: Let the inspections go forward, and don't lift the sanctions until the resolutions are complied with


Interview With Central China Television in Shanghai
July 1, 1998

The President. No. We're not the world's policeman. But sometimes we have to be prepared to do things that other countries can't or won't do. For example, I think we did absolutely theright thing these last several years to insist that we keep economic sanction on Iraq until they give up their weapons of mass destruction program. I think we did theright thing to go into Bosnia. I think we did theright thing to restore democracy in Haiti


The President's News Conference With President Boris Yeltsin of Russia in Moscow
September 2, 1998

President Yeltsin and I also agree that Iraq must comply fully with all relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions imposed after the gulf war and, in particular, must agree to allow the international weapons inspectors to again pursue their mission without obstruction or delay. Far from advancing the day sanctions are lifted, Iraq's most recent efforts to undermine the inspectors will perpetuate sanctions, prevent Iraq from acquiring the resources it needs to rebuild its military, and keep Iraq's economy under tight international control


The President's News Conference With President Václav Havel of the Czech Republic
September 16, 1998

So I feel very good about where I am—in relations—to the rest of the world. I had a good talk with President Chirac of France, who called me a couple of days ago to talk about some of our common concerns and the U.N. inspection system in Iraq and other things. So I feel good about that


Interview With April Ryan of the American Urban Radio Networks in Baltimore
November 1, 1998

The President. Well, we're examining that now. As a matter of fact, this afternoon my national security team is meeting. I've already had a couple of briefings about it. I think it's important to go back to the basics. First of all, let's look at the basics. 
At the end of the Gulf war, as part of the conditions of peace, Saddam Hussein agreed to suspend his biological, chemical, and nuclear programs, to be subject to inspections to see that that was done and to see that all the materials were destroyed. We were actually making, I thought, quite a bit of progress in that inspection after the last little crisis we had. And we were moving toward a resolution of some of the issues when he first suspended the inspections and now, apparently, has decided to terminate his participation in the U.N. inspection system. 
It's a clear violation of the commitments that he made, a clear violation of the U.N. Security Council resolutions. I, personally, am very pleased that the U.N. Security Council, including some people that I think have been a little tolerant with him in the past, strongly condemned what he did. From my point of view, we should keep all our options open, examine the nature of the action and where we are, and then do what's best for the integrity of the United Nations and the interests, the security interests, of the people of the United States. 
I think that's all I should say about it now. I want to let my people meet, let them give me some advice, and see where we go from here.


Remarks on the Patients' Bill of Rights
November 2, 1998

Let me say, before I begin, a few words about the situation in Iraq which has been dominating the news—and I haven't had a chance to talk to the American people through the press in the last couple of days. 
Saddam Hussein's latest refusal to cooperate with the international weapons inspectors is completely unacceptable. Once again, though, it will backfire. Far from dividing the international community and achieving concessions, his obstructionism was immediately and unanimously condemned by the United Nations Security Council. It has only served to deepen the international community's resolve. 
Just a short while ago, I met with my national security team to review the situation and discuss our next steps. Iraq must let the inspectors finish the job they started 7 years ago, a job Iraq promised to let them do repeatedly. 
What is that job? Making sure Iraq accounts for and destroys all its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons capability and the missiles to deliver such weapons. For Iraq, the only path to lifting sanctions is through complete cooperation with the weapons inspectors, without restrictions, runarounds, or roadblocks. 
In the coming days, we will be consulting closely with our allies and our friends in the region. Until the inspectors are back on the job, no options are off the table


Remarks on the Legislative Agenda and an Exchange With Reporters
November 5, 1998

The President. Well, actually, my information is that Secretary Cohen had a good trip, and we believe we'll have the support that we need for whatever decisions we ultimately make. 
The President. We believe we'll have the support we need, and all options are on the table


Remarks at a Veterans Day Ceremony in Arlington, Virginia
November 11, 1998

Nowhere is our vigilance more urgent than in the Persian Gulf, where Saddam Hussein's regime threatens the stability of one of the most vital regions of the world. Following the Gulf war, and as a condition for the cease-fire, the United Nations demanded, and Iraq agreed, to disclose and destroy its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons capabilities. 
This was no abstract concern. Saddam has fired Scuds at his neighbors, attacked Kuwait, and used chemical weapons in the war with Iran and even on his own people. To ensure that Iraq made good on its commitments, the United Nations kept in place tough economic sanctions while exempting food, medicine, and other humanitarian supplies to alleviate the suffering of the Iraqi people. The U.N. also established a group of highly professional weapons inspectors from dozens of countries, a group called UNSCOM, to oversee the destruction of Iraq's weapons capability and to monitor its ongoing compliance. 
For 7 years now, Iraq has had within its power the ability to put itself on the path to ending the sanctions and its isolation simply by complying with obligations it agreed to undertake. Instead, it has worked to shirk those obligations, withholding evidence about its weapons capability; threatening, harassing, blocking the inspectors; massing troops on the Kuwaiti border in the South; attacking the Kurds in the North. 
Our steadfast determination in maintaining sanctions, supporting the inspections system, enforcing a no-fly zone, and responding firmly to Iraqi provocations has stopped Iraq from rebuilding its weapons of mass destruction arsenal or from threatening its neighbors seriously. 
Now, over the past year Iraq has intensified its efforts to end the weapons inspection system, last fall threatening to overthrow—to throw American inspectors off the UNSCOM teams; then, in January, denying UNSCOM unfettered access to all the suspect weapon sites. Both times we built diplomatic pressure on Iraq, backed by overwhelming force, and Baghdad reversed course. Indeed, in March, again it gave a solemn commitment—this time to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan—that it would reopen all of Iraq to international weapons inspectors, without conditions or restrictions. 
In August, for the third time in only a year, again Iraq severely restricted the activities of the weapons inspectors. Again, we have gone the extra mile to obtain compliance by peaceful means, working through the U.N. Security Council and with our friends and allies to secure a unanimous Security Council resolution condemning Iraq's actions. We also supported, along with all the members of the Security Council, what Iraq says it wants, a comprehensive review of Iraq's compliance record, provided Saddam resumes full cooperation with the UNSCOM inspectors. 
Now, if Saddam Hussein is really serious about wanting sanctions lifted, there is an easy way to demonstrate that: Let UNSCOM do its job without interference—fully comply. The international community is united that Saddam must not have it both ways, by keeping his weapons of mass destruction capability and still getting rid of the sanctions. 
All of us agree that we prefer to resolve this crisis peacefully, for two reasons: first, because accomplishing goals through diplomacy is always preferable to using force; second, because reversing Iraq's decision and getting UNSCOM back on the job remains the most effective way to uncover, destroy, and prevent Iraq from reconstituting weapons of mass destruction and the missiles to deliver them. 
But if the inspectors are notpermitted to visit suspect sites or monitor compliance at known production facilities, they may as well be in Baltimore, not Baghdad. That would open a window of opportunity for Iraq to rebuild its arsenal of weapons and delivery systems in months—I say again, in months—not years. A failure to respond could embolden Saddam to act recklessly, signaling to him that he can, with impunity, develop these weapons of mass destruction or threaten his neighbors. And—this is very important, in an age when we look forward to weapons of mass destruction being a significant threat to civilized people everywhere. And it would permanently damage the credibility of the United Nations Security Council to act as a force for promoting international peace and security. We continue to hope— indeed, pray—that Saddam will comply, but we must be preparedtoact if he does not.

Remarks on Signing Legislation on Educational Assistance for Families of Slain Officers and on Penalties for Criminals Using Guns
November 13, 1998

Thank you very much, and good morning. Ladies and gentlemen, because this is the only time I'm going to be before the press today, at the outset of my remarks I'd like to say a few things about the situation in Iraq. 
For more than 3 months, the United States and the international community have very patiently sought a diplomatic solution to Iraq's decision to end all its cooperation with the U.N. weapons inspectors. Iraq's continued refusal to embrace a diplomatic, peaceful solution, its continued defiance of even more United Nations resolutions, makes it plainer than ever that its real goal is to end the sanctions without giving up its weapons of mass destruction program. 
The Security Council and the world have made it crystal clear now that this is unacceptable, that none of us can tolerate an Iraq free to develop weapons of mass destruction with impunity. Still, Saddam Hussein has it within his hands to end this crisis now by resuming full cooperation with UNSCOM. Just yesterday his own neighbors in the Arab world made it clear that this choice is his alone and the consequences, if he fails to comply, his alone in terms of responsibility.


Remarks on the Situation in Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
November 15, 1998

The President. Good morning. Last night Iraq agreed to meet the demands of the international community to cooperate fully with the United Nations weapons inspectors. Iraq committed to unconditional compliance. It rescinded its decisions of August and October to end cooperation with the inspectors. It withdrew its objectionable conditions. In short, Iraq accepted its obligation to permit all activities of the weapons inspectors, UNSCOM and the IAEA, to resume in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the U.N. Security Council. 
The United States, together with Great Britain, and with the support of our friends and allies around the world, was poised to act militarily if Iraq had not reversed course. Our willingness to strike, together with the overwhelming weight of world opinion, produced the outcome we preferred: Saddam Hussein reversing course, letting the inspectors go back to work without restrictions or conditions. 
As I have said since this crisis began, the return of the inspectors, if they can operate in an unfettered way, is the best outcome because they have been, and they remain, the most effective tool to uncover, destroy, and prevent Iraq from rebuilding its weapons of mass destruction and the missiles to deliver them. 
Now, let me be clear: Iraq has backed down, but that is not enough. Now Iraq must live up to its obligations. 
Iraq has committed to unconditionally resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors. What does that mean? First, Iraq must resolve all outstanding issues raised by UNSCOM and the IAEA. Second, it must give inspectors unfettered access to inspect and to monitor all sites they choose with no restrictions or qualifications, consistent with the memorandum of understanding Iraq itself signed with Secretary-General Annan in February. Third, it must turn over all relevant documents. Fourth, it must accept all weapons of mass destruction-related resolutions. Fifth, it must not interfere with the independence or the professional expertise of the weapons inspectors. 
Last night, again, I confirmed with the U.N. Security-General, Kofi Annan, that he shares these understandings of Iraq's obligations. 
In bringing on this crisis, Iraq isolated itself from world opinion and opinion in the region more than at any time since the Gulf war. The United Nations Security Council voted 15-0 to demand that Saddam Hussein reverse course. Eight Arab nations—Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, five other Gulf states—warned Saddam that Iraq alone would bear responsibility for the consequences of defying the United Nations. The world spoke with one voice: Iraq must accept once and for all that the only path forward is complete compliance with its obligations to the world. Until we see complete compliance, we will remain vigilant; we will keep up the pressure; we will be readytoact. 
This crisis also demonstrates, unfortunately, once again, that Saddam Hussein remains an impediment to the well-being of his people and a threat to the peace of his region and the security of the world. We will continue to contain the threat that he poses by working for the elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction capability under UNSCOM, enforcing the sanctions and the no-fly zone, responding firmly to any Iraqi provocations. 
However, over the long term, the best way to address that threat is through a government in Baghdad—a new government—that is committed to represent and respect its people, not repress them; that is committed to peace in the region. Over the past year we have deepened our engagement with the forces of change in Iraq, reconciling the two largest Kurdish opposition groups, beginning broadcasts of a Radio Free Iraq throughout the country. We will intensify that effort, working with Congress to implement the Iraq Liberation Act, which was recently passed, strengthening our political support to make sure the opposition—or to do what we can to make the opposition a more effective voice for the aspirations of the Iraqi people. 
Let me say again, what we want and what we will work for is a government in Iraq that represents and respects its people, not represses them, and one committed to live in peace with its neighbors. 
The President. That's right, and look what they did after we said that. That's right—look what's happened since they said that. We decided to delay the attack when we were informed that Iraq was going to make a—offer us a statement—the world, committing to complete compliance. And you will recall, when that statement came in, there were members of the international community and members of the Security Council who said that they thought that the statement was sufficient to avoid a military conflict and to get UNSCOM back in. We did not agree, and the British did not agree. Mr. Berger and Prime Minister Blair both went out and made statements to that effect. 
After that occurred, we received three subsequent letters from the Government of Iraq, going to the President of the Security Council, dealing with the three big holes we saw in the original Iraqi letter. 
First of all, it became clear, and they made it clear, that the attachment to the letter was in no way a condition of their compliance, that their compliance was not conditional. Secondly, they explicitly revoked the decisions they made in August and October to suspend cooperation with UNSCOM. And thirdly, they made it clear that they would not just let the inspectors back in to wander around in a very large country but that their cooperation with them would be unconditional and complete. 
Those were the things which occurred after Mr. Berger spoke and after Prime Minister Blair spoke. Those were the things which have caused us to conclude that with world opinion unanimous and with the ability to actually—the prospect, at least—of getting this inspection system going until we can complete the work that we have been working on now since the end of the Gulf war—it was those three things that made us believe we should go forward. That is the difference between where we are now and where we were yesterday when the United States and Great Britain made its statements. 
The President. Well, I think there are four things that I would say about it, with the beginning that no one can be sure. We're not—this is not a question of faith; this is a question of action. Let me remind you, the most important sentence in the statement I just read you was, "Iraq has backed down, but that's not enough. Now Iraq must live up to its obligations." 
Now, let me just point out four things. Number one, we have an unprecedented consensus here. I do not believe that anyone can doubt that there was an unprecedented consensus condemning what Saddam Hussein had done in not cooperating with UNSCOM. Number two, we had a very credible threat of overwhelming force, which was imminent had we not received word that Iraq was prepared to make the commitments we had been asking for. Number three, the set of commitments we received, in the end, after making our position clear yesterday in refusing to negotiate or water down our position, is clear and unambiguous. And number four, we remained readytoact. So we don't have to rely on our feelings here, or whether we believe anything. The question is, have we made the proper judgment to suspend any military action in order to give Iraq a chance to fulfill its commitments, even though it has failed to do so, so many times in the past. 
These four things are what you have to keep in mind. I believe—let me just say this—I believe we have made theright decision for a very specific reason, and I think it's very important that we keep hammering this home. If we takemilitaryaction, we can significantly degrade the capability of Saddam Hussein to develop weapons of mass destruction and to deliver them, but that would also mark the end of UNSCOM. So we would delay it, but we would then have no oversight, no insight, no involvement in what is going on within Iraq. 
If we can keep UNSCOM in there working and one more time give him a chance to become honorably reconciled by simply observing United Nations resolutions, we see that results can be obtained. 
Look, what has happened this year? We had the VX testing, and this summer—I can't remember exactly when it was; I'm sure that when my team comes up here to answer the questions, they can—we uncovered a very important document giving us—giving the world community information about the quantity and nature of weapons stocks that had not been available before. 
So I have to tell you, you have to understand where I'm coming from here. I really believe that if you have a professional UNSCOM, free and unfettered, able to do its job, it can do what it is supposed to do in Iraq. And given the fact that I believe that over the next 10 to 20 years, this whole issue of chemical and biological weaponry will be one of the major threats facing the world, having the experience, the record, and the success—if we can do it— of having a United Nations inspection regime in Iraq can have grave positive implications for the future—profound positive implications, if it works—and grave implications in a negative way if it doesn't. 
So I believe we made theright decision, and I believe that the factors that I cited to you make it theright decision. Now, what I—— 


Remarks on the Tobacco Settlement
November 16, 1998

Because this is my only opportunity to appear before the press today, I'd like to begin by making a few comments about the situation in Iraq. 
I am pleased that the weapons inspectors will return to Baghdad tomorrow to resume their work. As I've said from the start, the best outcome is to get the inspectors back on the job, provided they have unfettered access and full cooperation. 
We know what the inspectors can accomplish. Since the system was created and the inspections began, Iraq has been forced to declare and destroy, among other things, nearly 40,000 chemical weapons, nearly 700 tons of chemical weapons agents, 48 operational missiles, 30 warheads especially fitted for chemical and biological weapons, and a massive biological weapons plant equipped to produce anthrax and other deadly agents. 
The weapons inspectors, in short, have done a remarkable job. They must be permitted to finish their work. The burden of compliance is where it has always been—on Iraq. Baghdad has an affirmative obligation to comply with the U.N. resolutions that require it to disclose and destroy its weapons of mass destruction and the capability of delivering those weapons. 
Governments all over the world today stand united in sharing the conviction that full compliance, and nothing short of full compliance, is needed from Iraq. The world is watching Saddam Hussein to see if he follows the words he uttered with deeds. Our forces remain strong and ready if he does not


Remarks on Departure for Tokyo, Japan
November 18, 1998

I have spoken with Vice President Gore, who represented the United States so ably at the Asia-Pacific Economic Conference. The situation in Iraq, as you know, prevented me from attending, but I followed the proceedings very closely, and I got a good report from the Vice President. The summit has just concluded, and I'm very pleased that the leaders there made progress on our efforts to make trade more free and more fair so that we can increase prosperity for the new century

On this trip, we will also work to strengthen the security for our people. If Iraq's weapons of mass destruction have dominated recent headlines, we must be no less concerned by North Korea's weapons activities, including its provocative missile program and developments that could call into question its commitment to freeze and dismantle its nuclear weapons effort. This trip will give us an opportunity to address this critical issue where China has also played a very constructive role.


Remarks in "A Conversation With President Clinton" With Tetsuya Chikushi in Tokyo
November 19, 1998

The President. Well, first of all, the Pentagon estimate was not that high; but it's obvious that if we had conducted a comprehensive attack directed at their weapons of mass destruction program, the production capacity, the laboratories, all the supporting sites and the military infrastructure that supports it, that unless everyone knew in advance and left the premises, large numbers of people would be killed. And I believe the United States has a special responsibility, because of the unique position of our military might at this moment in history, to be very careful in that. 
Now, that's why I always said if Saddam Hussein would comply with the United Nations resolutions, we would not attack. Shortly before the attack was about to begin, we received word that they were going to send a letter committing to compliance. Then we worked all day to try to clarify it, and I think it was a good thing to try to solve this peacefully. Peace is always better than war, if you can do it consistent with the long-term security and freedom of the people. So I feel good about that. 
Secondly, I think that the inspection system offers us the best protection over the long run. But don't forget, you have suffered in Japan from the sarin gas attack. This is not an academic issue to you; this is a real issue to you. And Iraq is a nation that has actually used chemical weapons on its own people, on the Iranians, on others, had a biological weapons program of some significance, was attempting to develop a nuclear weapons program. 
So this is a very important issue for the world, and I would hope that all the countries of the world would continue to support an aggressive stance. I hope it will not lead to military action, but we have to be prepared, I believe, to takemilitaryaction because the issue is so great



The President's News Conference With President Kim Dae-jung of South Korea in Seoul
November 21, 1998

President Clinton. Well, first of all, I think it's important that we not overreact here on the first day. I want to make sure that I know exactly what the facts are. I believe that—the one thing that I would like to say, though, to Iraq and to the world, is that we think there are some affirmative obligations here. For most of the last several years, including the time when I've been President and the time before I was President, when most people would say that Iraq was cooperating with UNSCOM, their idea of cooperation was not to do anything affirmative to prevent UNSCOM from moving around a country that is a very large country. But for most of the time, they took no affirmative steps, as was their duty under the United Nations resolutions. 
Now, I think that Mr. Butler is a professional person. They are testing Iraq's commitments. And I hope that Iraq will comply, as it said it would in the letters just a few days ago, with the letter and the spirit of the U.N. resolutions, and give them the information they seek. Now, if they have some independent grounds for objecting to some of this information—that is, if they think it's some effort to find out something having nothing to do with matters covered by the U.N. resolutions—they ought to say that, and then we should immediately resolve it. 
But if they want the sanctions lifted because they have complied with all the U.N. resolutions on weapons, they have to give the information on the documents. And the longer they take to come up with the information on the documents and get to the bottom of this, the harder it's going to be to convince everyone else that they should get what they want. 
So this documentation, this information issue, is quite important. I will get extensively briefed on it, and we'll see where the other folks are on it. But I think the important thing is, Mr. Butler is a professional, and he's clearly trying to get information that he believes is essential to do his job. And I think the rest of us should support that


The President's Radio Address
November 21, 1998
Last week, when Saddam Hussein agreed to let international weapons inspectors return to Iraq, he backed down because we backed our diplomacy with force. In Bosnia, where the peace brokered at Dayton is taking hold, American troops are helping to preserve stability. And here on the Korean Peninsula, the last fault line of the cold war, nearly 40,000 Americans are helping Korea defend its freedom



Remarks to the Community at Osan Air Force Base, South Korea
November 22, 1998

One of the greatest threats the world now faces is weapons of mass destruction. And though our attention lately has been focused on Iraq's efforts in that area, North Korea is also a major concern. Here at Osan, you are critical to this most dangerous battleground, deterring and, if necessary, defending against chemical and biological attacks.


Remarks on Presenting the Eleanor Roosevelt Awards for Human Rights
December 10, 1998

Obviously, all nations have more work to do, and the United States is no exception. We must improve our own record. We must correct our own mistakes, even as we fulfill our responsibility to insist on improvement in other nations—in totalitarian states, like North Korea; in military dictatorships, like Burma; in countries where leaders practice the politics of ethnic hatred, like Serbia and Iraq; in African nations where tribal differences have led to unimaginable slaughter; in nations where tolerance and faith must struggle against intolerant fundamentalism, like Afghanistan and Sudan; in Cuba, where persons who strive for peaceful democratic change still are repressed and imprisoned; in China, where change has come to people's daily lives, but where basic political rights are still denied to too many.


Address to the Nation Announcing Military Strikes on Iraq
December 16, 1998

Good evening. Earlier today I ordered America's Armed Forces to strike military and security targets in Iraq. They are joined by British forces. Their mission is to attack Iraq's nuclear, chemical, and biological programs and its military capacity to threaten its neighbors. Their purpose is to protect the national interest of the United States and, indeed, the interest of people throughout the Middle East and around the world. Saddam Hussein must notbeallowed to threaten his neighbors or the world with nuclear arms, poison gas, or biological weapons. 
I want to explain why I have decided, with the unanimous recommendation of my national security team, to use force in Iraq; why we have acted now; and what we aim to accomplish. 
Six weeks ago Saddam Hussein announced that he would no longer cooperate with the United Nations weapons inspectors, called UNSCOM. They are highly professional experts from dozens of countries. Their job is to oversee the elimination of Iraq's capability to retain, create, and use weapons of mass destruction and to verify that Iraq does not attempt to rebuild that capability. The inspectors undertook this mission, first, 7 1/2 years ago at the end of the Gulf war, when Iraq agreed to declare and destroy its arsenal as a condition of the ceasefire. 
The international community had good reason to set this requirement. Other countries possess weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles. With Saddam, there's one big difference: He has used them, not once but repeatedly, unleashing chemical weapons against Iranian troops during a decade-long war, not only against soldiers but against civilians; firing Scud missiles at the citizens of Israel, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Iran, not only against a foreign enemy but even against his own people, gassing Kurdish civilians in northern Iraq. 
The international community had little doubt then, and I have no doubt today, that left unchecked, Saddam Hussein will use these terrible weapons again. 
The United States has patiently worked to preserve UNSCOM, as Iraq has sought to avoid its obligation to cooperate with the inspectors. On occasion, we've had to threaten military force, and Saddam has backed down. Faced with Saddam's latest act of defiance in late October, we built intensive diplomatic pressure on Iraq, backed by overwhelming military force in the region. The U.N. Security Council voted 15 to zero to condemn Saddam's actions and to demand that he immediately come into compliance. Eight Arab nations—Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, United Arab Emirates, and Oman—warned that Iraq alone would bear responsibility for the consequences of defying the U.N. 
When Saddam still failed to comply, we preparedtoact militarily. It was only then, at the last possible moment, that Iraq backed down. It pledged to the U.N. that it had made, and I quote, "a clear and unconditional decision to resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors." I decided then to call off the attack, with our airplanes already in the air, because Saddam had given in to our demands. I concluded then that theright thing to do was to use restraint and give Saddam one last chance to prove his willingness to cooperate. 
I made it very clear at that time what "unconditional cooperation" meant, based on existing U.N. resolutions and Iraq's own commitments. And along with Prime Minister Blair of Great Britain, I made it equally clear that if Saddam failed to cooperate fully, we would be preparedtoact without delay, diplomacy, or warning. 
Now, over the past 3 weeks, the U.N. weapons inspectors have carried out their plan for testing Iraq's cooperation. The testing period ended this weekend, and last night, UNSCOM's Chairman, Richard Butler, reported the results to U.N. Secretary-General Annan. The conclusions are stark, sobering, and profoundly disturbing. 
In four out of the five categories set forth, Iraq has failed to cooperate. Indeed, it actually has placed new restrictions on the inspectors. Here are some of the particulars: 
Iraq repeatedly blocked UNSCOM from inspecting suspect sites. For example, it shut off access to the headquarters of its ruling party and said it will deny access to the party's other offices, even though U.N. resolutions make no exception for them and UNSCOM has inspected them in the past. 
Iraq repeatedly restricted UNSCOM's ability to obtain necessary evidence. For example, Iraq obstructed UNSCOM's effort to photograph bombs related to its chemical weapons program. It tried to stop an UNSCOM biological weapons team from videotaping a site and photocopying documents and prevented Iraqi personnel from answering UNSCOM's questions. Prior to the inspection of another site, Iraq actually emptied out the building, removing not just documents but even the furniture and the equipment. Iraq has failed to turn over virtually all the documents requested by the inspectors; indeed, we know that Iraq ordered the destruction of weapons-related documents in anticipation of an UNSCOM inspection. 
So Iraq has abused its final chance. As the UNSCOM report concludes, and again I quote, "Iraq's conduct ensured that no progress was able to be made in the fields of disarmament. In light of this experience and in the absence of full cooperation by Iraq, it must, regrettably, be recorded again that the Commission is not able to conduct the work mandated to it by the Security Council with respect to Iraq's prohibited weapons program." 
In short, the inspectors are saying that, even if they could stay in Iraq, their work would be a sham. Saddam's deception has defeated their effectiveness. Instead of the inspectors disarming Saddam, Saddam has disarmed the inspectors. 
This situation presents a clearandpresent danger to the stability of the Persian Gulf and the safety of people everywhere. The international community gave Saddam one last chance to resume cooperation with the weapons inspectors. Saddam has failed to seize the chance. 
And so we had to act, and act now. Let me explain why. 
First, without a strong inspections system, Iraq would be free to retain and begin to rebuild its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons programs in months, not years. 
Second, if Saddam can cripple the weapons inspections system and get away with it, he would conclude that the international community, led by the United States, has simply lost its will. He will surmise that he has free rein to rebuild his arsenal of destruction. And some day, make no mistake, he will use it again, as he has in the past. 
Third, in halting our airstrikes in November, I gave Saddam a chance, not a license. If we turn our backs on his defiance, the credibility of U.S. power as a check against Saddam will be destroyed. We will not only have allowed Saddam to shatter the inspections system that controls his weapons of mass destruction program; we also will have fatally undercut the fear of force that stops Saddam from acting to gain domination in the region. 
That is why, on the unanimous recommendation of my national security team, including the Vice President, Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Secretary of State, and the National Security Adviser, I have ordered a strong, sustained series of airstrikes against Iraq. They are designed to degrade Saddam's capacity to develop and deliver weapons of mass destruction, and to degrade his ability to threaten his neighbors. At the same time, we are delivering a powerful message to Saddam: If you act recklessly, you will pay a heavy price. 
We acted today because, in the judgment of my military advisers, a swift response would provide the most surprise and the least opportunity for Saddam to prepare. If we had delayed for even a matter of days from Chairman Butler's report, we would have given Saddam more time to disperse his forces and protect his weapons. 
Also, the Muslim holy month of Ramadan begins this weekend. For us to initiate military action during Ramadan would be profoundly offensive to the Muslim world and, therefore, would damage our relations with Arab countries and the progress we have made in the Middle East. That is something we wanted very much to avoid without giving Iraq a month's headstart to prepare for potential action against it. 
Finally, our allies, including Prime Minister Tony Blair of Great Britain, concurred that now is the time to strike. 
I hope Saddam will come into cooperation with the inspection system now and comply with the relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions. But we have to be prepared that he will not, and we must deal with the very real danger he poses. So we will pursue a long-term strategy to contain Iraq and its weapons of mass destruction and work toward the day when Iraq has a Government worthy of its people. 
First, we must be preparedtouseforce again if Saddam takes threatening actions, such as trying to reconstitute his weapons of mass destruction or their delivery systems, threatening his neighbors, challenging allied aircraft over Iraq, or moving against his own Kurdish citizens. The credible threat to use force, and when necessary, the actual use of force, is the surest way to contain Saddam's weapons of mass destruction program, curtail his aggression, and prevent another Gulf war. 
Second, so long as Iraq remains out of compliance, we will work with the international community to maintain and enforce economic sanctions. Sanctions have cost Saddam more than $120 billion, resources that would have been used to rebuild his military. The sanctions system allows Iraq to sell oil for food, for medicine, for other humanitarian supplies for the Iraqi people. We have no quarrel with them. But without the sanctions, we would see the oilfor-food program become oil-for-tanks, resulting in a greater threat to Iraq's neighbors and less food for its people. 
The hard fact is that so long as Saddam remains in power, he threatens the well-being of his people, the peace of his region, the security of the world. The best way to end that threat once and for all is with a new Iraqi Government, a Government ready to live in peace with its neighbors, a Government that respects therights of its people. 
Bringing change in Baghdad will take time and effort. We will strengthen our engagement with the full range of Iraqi opposition forces and work with them effectively and prudently. 
The decision to use force is never cost-free. Whenever American forces are placed in harm's way, we risk the loss of life. And while our strikes are focused on Iraq's military capabilities, there will be unintended Iraqi casualties. Indeed, in the past, Saddam has intentionally placed Iraqi civilians in harm's way in a cynical bid to sway international opinion. We must be prepared for these realities. At the same time, Saddam should have absolutely no doubt: If he lashes out at his neighbors, we will respond forcefully. 
Heavy as they are, the costs of action must be weighed against the price of inaction. If Saddam defies the world and we fail to respond, we will face a far greater threat in the future. Saddam will strike again at his neighbors. He will make war on his own people. And mark my words, he will develop weapons of mass destruction. He will deploy them, and he will use them. Because we are acting today, it is less likely that we will face these dangers in the future. 
Let me close by addressing one other issue. Saddam Hussein and the other enemies of peace may have thought that the serious debate currently before the House of Representatives would distract Americans or weaken ourresolve to face him down. But once more, the United States has proven that, although we are never eager to use force, when we mustact in America's vitalinterests, we will do so. 
In the century we're leaving, America has often made the difference between chaos and community, fear and hope. Now, in a new century, we'll have a remarkable opportunity to shape a future more peaceful than the past but only if we stand strong against the enemies of peace. Tonight, the United States is doing just that

Remarks on the Military Strikes on Iraq and an Exchange With Reporters
December 17, 1998

The President. My national security team is about to update me and the Vice President on the status of our operation in Iraq. I'd like to begin by speaking for every American in expressing my gratitude to our men and women in uniform and also to our British allies, who are participating in this operation with us. 
I am convinced the decision I made to order this military action, though difficult, was absolutely theright thing to do. It is in our interest and in the interest of people all around the world. Saddam Hussein has used weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles before; I have no doubt he would use them again if permitted to develop them. 
When I halted military action against Saddam last November, after he had terminated the UNSCOM operations, I made it very clear that we were giving him a last chance to cooperate. Once again he promised in very explicit terms that he would fully cooperate. On Tuesday the inspectors concluded that they were no longer able to do their jobs and that, in fact, he had raised even new barriers to their doing their jobs. 
Then yesterday morning I gave the order because I believe that we cannotallow Saddam Hussein to dismantle UNSCOM and resume the production of weapons of mass destruction with impunity. I also believe that to have done so would have, in effect, given him a green light for whatever he might want to do in his neighborhood. I think it would be a terrible, terrible mistake. 
We acted yesterday because Secretary Cohen and General Shelton strongly urged that we act at the point where we could have maximum impact with minimum risk to our own people because of the surprise factor. We also wanted to avoid initiating any military action during the Muslim holy month of Ramadan, which is slated to begin in just a couple of days. 
Our mission is clear: to degrade his capacity to develop and to use weapons of mass destruction or to threaten his neighbors. I believe we will achieve that mission, and I'm looking forward to getting this briefing. 
We have given Saddam Hussein chance after chance to cooperate with UNSCOM. We said in November that this was the last chance. We got the report from Mr. Butler saying that he was not cooperating and, in fact, raised new barriers to cooperation. And we acted just as we promised we would. We acted swiftly because we were ready, thanks to the very fine work of the Defense Department in leaving our assets properly deployed. We had the strong support of the British. 
The President. I'm about to get a—it's an ongoing mission. I want to wait—— 
The President. I do not. I can tell you what I said last night: We did everything we could to carefully target military and national security targets and to minimize civilian casualties. There is always a prospect that the missiles will miss, that they will be interrupted because of the missiles being fired at them, trying to deflect them from their intended targets. I am quite sure there will be, as I said last evening, unintended casualties, and I regret that very much. 
That's one of the reasons that I have bent over backwards, not just in November but also on previous occasions to avoid using force in this case. I did not want to do it; I think all of you know it. But in November, we literally had planes in the air, and I said that it would be the last chance. I think it is very important that we notallow Saddam Hussein to destroy the UNSCOM system without any penalty whatever, to eventually get all these sanctions lifted and to go right on just as if he never made any commitments that were unfulfilled on this score. I think it would have been a disaster for us to do this. 
And so, regrettably, I made this decision. There is, I believe, no way to avoid some unintended civilian casualties, and I regret it very much. But I believe far, far more people would have died eventually from this man's regime had we not taken this action.


Remarks Honoring Eunice Kennedy Shriver at the Special Olympics Dinner
December 17, 1998

Let me say just for a moment, I am also thinking tonight about the brave American men and women in uniform who are carrying out our mission in Iraq with our British allies. I know that our thoughts and our prayers, indeed, those of all the American people, are with them tonight. And I wanted to say that what they are doing is important. It will make the world a safer, more peaceful place for our children in the 21st century

Remarks at a Meeting With the President's Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS
December 18, 1998

Our major military mission in the last 6 months, before the operation in Iraq, has been to send several thousand of our uniformed personnel to Central America to help them rebuild after Hurricane Mitch. It's not only theright thing to do from a humanitarian point of view, it is in our national interest. Because if those countries don't rebuild, they will become highly vulnerable to all the drug traffickers. And if they don't rebuild, then all their people will have to come here and, if they can't get here legally, they will try to become illegal immigrants. So there's all these things that we need to begin to see our relationships beyond our borders as more of an extension of our relationships with one another rather than as something totally different and apart from our relations with one another


Address to Arab Nations
December 19, 1998
Thank you for this opportunity to address America's friends throughout the Arab and the entire Islamic world. I want to explain why we have taken military action against Saddam Hussein, and why we believe this action is in the interests of the Iraqi people and all the people of the Middle East. 
Saddam has ruled through a reign of terror against his own people and disregard for the peace of the region. His war against Iran cost at least half a million lives over 10 years. He gassed Kurdish civilians in northern Iraq. In 1990 his troops invaded Kuwait, executing those who resisted, looting the country, spilling tens of millions of gallons of oil into the Gulf, firing missiles at Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Israel, and Qatar. He massacred thousands of his own people in an uprising in 1991. 
As a condition for the Gulf war cease-fire, Iraq agreed to disclose and to destroy its weapons of mass destruction and to demonstrate its willingness to live at peace with its neighbors. Iraq could have ended economic sanctions and isolation long ago by meeting these simple obligations. Instead, it has spent nearly 8 years defying them. Saddam has failed to disclose information about his weapons arsenal. He has threatened his neighbors and refused to account for hundreds of Kuwaitis still missing from 1991. 
Each time Saddam has provoked a crisis, we've tried hard to find a peaceful solution, consulting our friends in the Arab world and working through the United Nations. A month ago we joined the other 14 members of the U.N. Security Council in demanding that Saddam come into compliance immediately. We supported what Iraq said it wanted: a comprehensive review of its compliance after it resumed full cooperation with the U.N. weapons inspectors. And we were gratified when eight Arab nations, Egypt, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the UAE, and Oman, warned that Iraq would bear the blame—Iraq alone would bear the blame for the consequences of defying the U.N. 
Now, I canceled a military strike when, at the last moment, Saddam promised to cooperate unconditionally with the inspectors. But this month he broke his promises again, and again defied the U.N. So, we had to act. Saddam simply must notbeallowed to threaten his neighbors or the world with nuclear arms, poison gas, or biological weapons. 
America understands that Saddam's first victims are his own people. That is why we exempted food and medicine when sanctions were imposed on Iraq. That is why, since 1991, we have offered to allow Iraq to sell its oil and use the proceeds to pay for humanitarian supplies. For 5 years, Saddam rejected that offer while building lavish palaces for himself and diverting resources to his military. 
Finally, in 1996, Saddam allowed the oil-forfood program to take effect. Since then, the U.N. has delivered nearly $3 billion worth of food and medicine to the Iraqi people every year. Without the watchful eye of the U.N., we would soon see the oil-for-food program become oil-for-tanks, leading to less food for the Iraqi people and more danger for Iraq's neighbors. 
No decision to use force is easy, especially at a time when I'm working so hard to build peace in the Middle East and to strengthen our own relations with the Arab world. My visit to Gaza last week reflected my deep commitment to the peace process. I will never forget the warm welcome I received from the Palestinian people, eager to shape their own future at last. 

Address to the Nation on Completion of Military Strikes in Iraq
December 19, 1998

On Wednesday I ordered our Armed Forces to strike military and strategic targets in Iraq. They were joined by British forces. That operation is now complete, in accordance with our 70-hour plan. 
My national security team has just briefed me on the results. They are preliminary, but let me say just a few words about why we acted, what we have achieved, and where we want to go. 
We began with this basic proposition: Saddam Hussein must notbeallowed to develop nuclear arms, poison gas, biological weapons, or the means to deliver them. He has used such weapons before against soldiers and civilians, including his own people. We have no doubt that, if left unchecked, he would do so again. 
Saddam must not be prepared to defy the will—be permitted—excuse me—to defy the will of the international community. Without a firm response, he would have been emboldened to do that again and again. 
For 7 1/2 years now, the United Nations weapons inspectors have done a truly remarkable job in forcing Saddam to disclose and destroy weapons and missiles he insisted he did not have. But over the past year, Saddam has repeatedly sought to cripple the inspection system. Each time, through intensive diplomatic efforts backed by the threat of military action, Saddam has backed down. When he did so last month, I made it absolutely clear that if he did not give UNSCOM full cooperation this time, we would act swiftly and without further delay. 
For 3 weeks, the inspectors tested Saddam's commitment to cooperate. They repeatedly ran into roadblocks and restrictions, some of them new. As their chairman, Richard Butler, concluded in his report to the United Nations on Tuesday, the inspectors no longer were able to do their job. So far as I was concerned, Saddam's days of cheat and retreat were over. 
Our objectives in this military action were clear: to degrade Saddam's weapons of mass destruction program and related delivery systems, as well as his capacity to attack his neighbors. It will take some time to make a detailed assessment of our operation, but based on the briefing I've just received, I am confident we have achieved our mission. We have inflicted significant damage on Saddam's weapons of mass destruction programs, on the command structures that direct and protect that capability, and on his military and security infrastructure. In a short while, Secretary Cohen and General Shelton will give you a more detailed analysis from the Pentagon. 
So long as Saddam remains in power, he will remain a threat to his people, his region, and the world. With our allies, we must pursue a strategy to contain him and to constrain his weapons of mass destruction program, while working toward the day Iraq has a government willing to live at peace with its people and with its neighbors. 
Let me describe the elements of that strategy going forward. First, we will maintain a strong military presence in the area, and we will remain ready to use it if Saddam tries to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction, strikes out at his neighbors, challenges allied aircraft, or moves against the Kurds. We also will continue to enforce no-fly zones in the north and from the southern suburbs of Baghdad to the Kuwaiti border. 
Second, we will sustain what have been among the most extensive sanctions in U.N. history. To date, they have cost Saddam more than $120 billion, resources that otherwise would have gone toward rebuilding his military. At the same time, we will support a continuation of the oil-for-food program, which generates more than $10 billion a year for food, medicine, and other critical humanitarian supplies for the Iraqi people. We will insist that Iraq's oil be used for food, not tanks. 
Third, we would welcome the return of UNSCOM and the International Atomic Energy Agency back into Iraq to pursue their mandate from the United Nations, provided that Iraq first takes concrete, affirmative, and demonstrable actions to show that it will fully cooperate with the inspectors. But if UNSCOM is notallowed to resume its work on a regular basis, we will remain vigilant and preparedtouseforce if we see that Iraq is rebuilding its weapons programs. 
Now, over the long-term, the best way to end the threat that Saddam poses to his own people in the region is for Iraq to have a different government. We will intensify our engagement with the Iraqi opposition groups, prudently and effectively. We will work with Radio Free Iraq to help news and information flow freely to the country. And we will stand ready to help a new leadership in Baghdad that abides by its international commitments and respects therights of its own people. We hope it will return Iraq to its rightful place in the community of nations. 

Remarks Announcing Social Security System Compliance With Year 2000 Computer Problem Safeguards
December 28, 1998

Ladies and gentlemen, before I get into my remarks, because this is the only opportunity I will have to appear before the press today, I think I should say a few words about an incident early this morning over the skies of Iraq, where American and British aircrews were enforcing a no-fly zone in northern Iraq. They were fired on by Iraq's surface-to-air missiles. They took evasive action, returned fire on the missile site, and returned safely to their base in Turkey. 
We enforce two no-fly zones in Iraq: one in the north, established in 1991; another in the south, established in 1992, which now stretches from the southern suburbs of Baghdad down to the Kuwaiti border. The no-fly zones have been and will remain an important part of our containment policy. Because we effectively control the skies over much of Iraq, Saddam has been unable to use air power to repress his own people or to lash out again at his neighbors. Our pilots have the authority to protect themselves if they're threatened or attacked. They took appropriate action today in responding to Iraq's actions.



The President's Radio Address
January 2, 1999
Almost 1.4 million Americans are serving our country on active duty today. Nearly a quarter million of them are overseas, doing what needs to be done as no one else can, whether that means thwarting Iraq's ambition to threaten its neighbors or the world with weapons of mass destruction, or standing watch in Korea on the last fortified frontier of the cold war, or safeguarding the peace in Bosnia, or helping our neighbors in Central America or the Caribbean dig out from natural disasters, or simply giving us the confidence that America will be forever strong, safe, and secure


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the Economic Club of Detroit in Detroit, Michigan
January 8, 1999

And what's happening is, as we've downsized the military, the following problems have arisen, and you should all be aware of them. Number one, the deployments overseas are lasting longer, and the breaks between them are shorter. Number two, we haven't had the money to replace and repair our equipment as rapidly as we should. Number three, married people in the military who have families and children and who need to live in military housing have not seen any significant improvements in their military housing. Number four, we have not done as much as we could have done, and as much I think we'll have to do in the years ahead, in modernizing the weapons that we have. And as you saw in the recent military action in Iraq, where we did a terrific amount of damage to the military infrastructure and the weapons of mass destruction infrastructure—while causing the deaths, the unintended deaths of far, far, fewer civilians than were lost even in the Gulf war a few years ago—the technological edge the United States has is very important

You know, not a single one of those planes that flew in Iraq came down, not a single bolt came loose, because people that you will never see worked like crazy, maintaining those planes in tip-top shape condition. They should—no American pilot, no man or woman that flies those airplanes should ever have to worry about getting into an airplane, worrying about whether it's been properly maintained, whether the equipment was there and all of these things


Address on the Observance of Id al-F?´tr
January 19, 1999

I fervently hope that the new Moon will stand for a rising tide of peace on Earth, in the Middle East, Asia, Iran, Afghanistan, Africa, every place where devoted people aspire and deserve to lead lives of fulfillment and self-respect. I especially hope we will see the lives of the Iraqi people improve. They have suffered for too long from oppression and war.


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 19, 1999

For nearly a decade, Iraq has defied its obligations to destroy its weapons of terror and the missiles to deliver them. America will continue to contain Saddam, and we will work for the day when Iraq has a Government worthy of its people. 
Now, last month in our action over Iraq, our troops were superb. Their mission was so flawlessly executed that we risk taking for granted the bravery and the skill it required. Captain Jeff Taliaferro, a 10-year veteran of the Air Force, flew a B-1B bomber over Iraq as we attacked Saddam's war machine. He's here with us tonight. I'd like to ask you to honor him and all the 33,000 men and women of Operation Desert Fox



Interview With Judith Miller and William J. Broad of the New York Times
January 21, 1999

That's why we started this conversation by saying, I don't want to say anything that will overly alarm anybody. I'm not trying to stir up a lot of false threats. But if you look at just what the UNSCOM people in Iraq—they say that they don't believe that the reporting in Iraq is consistent with what they believe the chemical capacity there is.



The President's News Conference With President Jacques Chirac of France
February 19, 1999

We discussed the continuing challenge of promoting economic recovery in Russia and working with Russia to prevent its weapons of mass destruction, missiles, and technologies from falling into the hands of outlaw nations and terrorists. We will continue our cooperation on securing peace in the Middle East. We talked about the Middle East peace process at some length. We talked about our common determination to restrain Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program

[There is another point in this conference when Clinton is asked about Iraq, but his answer indicates he thought the question was about Serbia.]

The President's News Conference With President Jerry John Rawlings of Ghana
February 24, 1999

No, we have not given up on the prospect of restoring inspections. But since Saddam Hussein terminated his cooperation with UNSCOM and then the military action was taken by the United States, Great Britain, with the support of our allies, they have continued to defy the U.N., and that's where we are now. That brings us back to your first question. 
What's going on with these incidents is that under the United Nations resolutions, which are still in place, the no-fly zone still exists. The no-fly zone has to be patrolled. When it is patrolled by American and British pilots, from time to time, as you pointed out, there have now been several instances when Israeli air defense—excuse me, Iraqi air defense weapons have been fired at our airplanes. And they're trying, obviously, for the symbolic victory of shooting one of these planes down, and perhaps trying to intimidate us from enforcing the nofly zone, which we're still bound to do under the United Nations resolution. 
Now, in response to that, we have certain rules of engagement which permit us to take out the air defense. And we have done quite a lot of it. I noticed there was one column in the press in the last week—I think it was Mr. Seib's [Jerry Seib, Wall Street Journal] column—but anyway, it was a column which pointed out that a significant amount of damage, perhaps as much damage or more, has been done to the air defense network since the end of the last military action than was done during the military action, where we had a lot broader range of targets we were going after. 
And I regret this, you know. I regret this. I wish he would stop doing that. I wish he would make an agreement with the United Nations to let the inspections go back. We have shown that we are not interested in hurting the Iraqi people. We have been for broader rules for meeting the nonmilitary needs of the people of Iraq, and we will continue to work at that. 
But these little encounters—each of them so far has been relatively small—are as a result of the fact that we are still, notwithstanding the fact that the inspectors aren't there, bound to enforce a no-fly zone which still exists under the U.N. resolutions


Remarks on United States Foreign Policy in San Francisco
February 26, 1999

In the last 6 years, fighting that threat has become a central priority of American foreign policy. Here, too, there is much more to be done. We are working to stop weapons from spreading at the source, as with Russia. We are working to keep Iraq in check so that it does not threaten the rest of the world or its region with weapons of mass destruction. We are using all the means at our disposal to deny terrorists safe havens, weapons, and funds. Even if it takes years, terrorists must know there is no place to hide


Remarks at the Sixth Millennium Evening at the White House
March 15, 1999

This is the 50th anniversary of the International Declaration of Human Rights. It is simply notacceptable to say that this is nothing more than an expression of religious convictions. We just had an election in Iran, local elections. There were hundreds of women candidates. We see, even in Iraq, a country we have serious differences with, their women are not subject to these sorts of constraints because they are women


Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With the American Society of Newspaper Editors in San Francisco, California
April 15, 1999

The other problem is a practical one, which is sometimes it takes—in the Gulf, when we fought in Iraq in Desert Storm and later when we had our actions there, neither the weather nor the terrain presented the barriers to actually assessing quickly what the impact of the action was that is presented in the Balkans. So sometimes there is just an inevitable delay, which is one of the reasons that—last week I talked to Secretary Cohen and General Shelton about having the Pentagon do a big briefing to be much more detailed about what, in fact, had happened and what conclusions we drew from it


Remarks Following Dinner With the Troops at Ramstein Air Base
May 5, 1999

There are a lot of things I'd like to say, as briefly as I can. First of all, I'd like to tell you I had a real good time tonight taking all the pictures and—[laughter]—I like having the opportunity to look our men and women in uniform in the eye and see where you're from and hear a little about your views. I thank especially the people who had dinner with me at the table over there tonight. I got questions about the Middle East peace process and the situation in Iraq and the long-term prospects in Kosovo and—— 


Commencement Address at the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs
June 2, 1999

Those qualities are on display today when Air Force men and women serve at home and abroad, from Iraq to Korea, to helping hurricane victims in Central America, and now in the historic effort to reverse the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo and restore the people of that shattered land to their homes.


Remarks at Whiteman Air Force Base in Knob Noster, Missouri
June 11, 1999

In this decade, in the wake of the cold war, our men and women in uniform have played a crucial role, and so have you. And with the B-2, you have been even closer to the frontlines. From Iraq to Haiti to Bosnia to Kosovo, our men and women in uniform have shown dictators they can't shatter their people and threaten their neighbors with impunity


The President's News Conference With President Jacques Chirac of France in Paris
June 17, 1999

President Clinton. Well, as you know, there is some difference here. I think largely it's a difference over what is likely to be more effective. The United States supports the efforts of the British and the Dutch and the Security Council because we believe that without the strongest possible inspection mechanism, Saddam Hussein will attempt to rebuild weapons of mass destruction stocks, particularly in the chemical and biological areas and perhaps missile technology, as well. 
This is not an easy issue, and I respect the efforts that the French are making, that the President is making. I can tell you generally what my concern is. It is not so much Saddam Hussein himself as my belief that 10 years from now, the person who is standing here as President and the person who is standing there as the President of France will be—and all of you, those of you who will be here asking questions, one of the things that you will be really worried about is the spread of biological and chemical weapons, probably high-tech, small-scale weapons, into the hands of international terrorist groups and organized crime groups that have loose relationships with irresponsible countries that give them these things. And I think it will be a substantial problem for the first couple of decades of the next century. And I just think we ought to do everything we possibly can to minimize that problem. 


Interview With Yevgeniy Kiselev of Russia's NTV in Cologne
June 20, 1999

The President. The first part of your question, I have spoken to quite extensively in America. First, America did actually play a very major role in preserving an area of protection for the Kurds in northern Iraq for several years after the Gulf war. And we have, several times, intervened to try to help protect the Kurds and will continue to be sensitive to that


The President's News Conference
June 25, 1999
I know that from your point of view, there were a lot of civilian casualties, but that's because you got to cover them as opposed to covering the civilian casualties of the Gulf war. If you talked to any military person that was involved in both conflicts, they will tell you that there were far, far more civilian casualties in Iraq. I mean, many more by several times as many


The President's News Conference With President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt
July 1, 1999

President Clinton. Let me say, our position on Iraq is that we favor the proposal before the United Nations, advanced by the British and the Dutch. It would provide for more money to Iraq to help the people there, with their human needs. But it would maintain a vigorous arms control regime, because we do not believe that Saddam Hussein should be permitted to develop again weapons of mass destruction. 
And I would remind everyone that he has actually used weapons of mass destruction. He has used chemical weapons on the Iranians. He has used them on his own people, on the Kurds that live in Iraq. 
So I think that we have a balanced position. But I have never wanted the Iraqi people to suffer because of their leader. And I think we supported a relaxation of the way the funds flow there so that more can go to benefit the people. But I do not believe we should give up on an attempt, an insistence, indeed, that the United Nations, in return for this, maintain an arms control regime.


Remarks to the 54th Session of the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 21, 1999

For almost a decade nations have stood together to keep the Iraqi regime from threatening its people and the world with such weapons. Despite all the obstacles Saddam Hussein has placed in our path, we must continue to ease the suffering of the people of Iraq. At the same time, we cannotallow the Government of Iraq to flout 40—and I say 40 successive U.N. Security Council resolutions and to rebuild his arsenal


Remarks on Signing the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000
October 5, 1999

Today, we have about 1.4 million men and women serving our country on active duty, doing what needs to be done from Korea to Kosovo, to Bosnia, to Iraq, to helping our neighbors in the hemisphere and in Turkey dig out from natural disasters, to simply giving us confidence that America is forever strong and secure.


Remarks at Georgetown University
November 8, 1999
The armed forces of most every country, from Ukraine to Romania all the way to Central Asia, now actually train with NATO. NATO has three new allies, Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, three strong democracies that have stood with us in every crisis, from Iraq to Bosnia to Kosovo. Other new democracies are eager to join us as well, including Slovakia, and they know our alliance is open to all who are ready to meet its obligations. Eleven countries are beginning a process that will lead them to membership in the European Union

We have to bring China into the World Trade Organization, while continuing to speak plainly about human rights and religious freedom. We have to launch a new global trade round, enact the African and Caribbean trade bills, press ahead with debt relief, support the hopeful transitions to democracy in Nigeria and Indonesia, help Colombia defeat the narcotraffickers, contain Iraq, and restrain North Korea's missile program. We have to continue to do more to fight terrorism around the world. And we must do what is necessary—and for the young people here, I predict for 20 years this will become a national security issue—we have to do more to reverse the very real phenomenon of global warming and climate change


Remarks to the Turkish Grand National Assembly in Ankara
November 15, 1999

Turkey's ability to bridge East and West is all the more important when another fact of Turkey's geography is considered. You are almost entirely surrounded by neighbors who are either actively hostile to democracy and peace or struggling against great obstacles to embrace democracy and peace. To the southeast, Iran is witnessing a remarkable debate between proponents of a closed and open society, while Iraq continues to repress its people, threaten its neighbors, and seek weapons of mass destruction. I thank Turkey for its support of Operation Northern Watch, which allows us to deter Saddam's aggression, protect the people of northern Iraq, and avoid another refugee crisis like the one you so courageously met in 1991


Remarks to the Democratic Leadership Council
January 12, 2000

Our country has helped to further the cause of peace from Northern Ireland to the Middle East to Bosnia and Kosovo to Haiti; established new partnerships with Latin America, Asia, and Africa for economic cooperation; restrained the nuclear missile programs of North Korea; fought against Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program; worked to reduce the threat of terrorism, chemical and biological weapons; cut thousands of nuclear weapons in the arsenals of Russia and the United States; expanded NATO; increased our debt relief and economic assistance to the poorest countries of the world. We have helped to minimize economic problems in Asia and Mexico and concluded over 270 trade agreements, all with a view toward implementing the basic ideas that were articulated in 1992 and developed in the years before through the Democratic Leadership Council.


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 27, 2000

We must meet this threat by making effective agreements to restrain nuclear and missile programs in North Korea, curbing the flow of lethal technology to Iran, preventing Iraq from threatening its neighbors, increasing our preparedness against chemical and biological attack, protecting our vital computer systems from hackers and criminals, and developing a system to defend against new missile threats, while working to preserve our ABM missile treaty with Russia. We must do all these things.


Remarks on Funding for Native American Programs and an Exchange With Reporters
February 25, 2000

The President. What we are reviewing is whether there is some way to continue our policy of meeting human needs without allowing Saddam Hussein to rearm. I think it's clear to everybody who has looked at the facts, however, that they're exporting about as much oil now as they were before the embargo was imposed. And any continued suffering from lack of food and medicine on the part of Iraqi children or the poor is the result of Saddam Hussein's policies, not this embargo. 
If you look at the difference in the health indicators of children in the north of Iraq where this program, the oil for food program, has been administered by the United Nations and in the rest of Iraq where it's been administered by Saddam Hussein, it's perfectly clear that he has increased the misery of his people and has blamed us for something that is no longer— clearly—clearly no longer attributable to the international community. 
Nonetheless, if there is a way to further free up resources for the overall health and development of the people of Iraq without doing anything that will make it easier for him to rearm in ways that will be damaging to his neighbors and to the stability of the region, we ought to be open to that. And we ought to be careful and constructive in listening to arguments about it.



Videotaped Remarks to the Carnegie Endowment's Annual Nonproliferation Conference
March 16, 2000

I know this conference will assess the potential impact of our program directed at emerging missile threats, such as from North Korea, Iran, and Iraq. I've stressed that a U.S. decision on a limited missile defense will take into account not only the threat, feasibility, and cost but also the overall impact on our security and arms control


Remarks at a Discussion at the Ministers' Leadership Conference in South Barrington, Illinois
August 10, 2000

But every time you do that, every time you unleash a missile or send a pilot, and you know that it's life and death, you just have to pray you're right. We did it in actions—there were other times when we took actions over Iraq. There were other times we—more limited actions in Bosnia, because thank goodness, we brought them to the peace table. But I think those are the hardest things.


Remarks to the Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles, California
August 14, 2000

The American military is the best trained, best equipped, most effective fighting force in the world. Our men and women have shown that time and again in Bosnia, in Kosovo, in Haiti, and Iraq. I can tell you that their strength, their spirit, their courage, and their commitment to freedom have never been greater. Any adversary who believes those who say otherwise is making a grave mistake


Remarks at Georgetown University
September 1, 2000
We have also acted to reduce the threat posed by states that have sought weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles, while pursuing activities that are clearly hostile to our longterm interests. For over a decade—for almost a decade, excuse me—we have diverted about 90 percent of Iraq's oil revenues from the production of weapons to the purchase of food and medicine. This is an important statistic for those who believe that our sanctions are only a negative for the people, and particularly the children, of Iraq. In 1989 Iraq earned $15 billion from oil exports and spent $13 billion of that money on its military. This year Iraq is projected to earn $19 billion from its legal oil-for-food exports but can spend none of those revenues on the military



Remarks to the United Nations Millennium Summit in New York City
September 6, 2000

The last century taught us that there are times when the international community must take a side, not merely stand between the sides or on the sidelines. We faced such a test and met it when Mr. Milosevic tried to close the last century with a final chapter of ethnic cleansing and slaughter. We have faced such a test for 10 years in Iraq, where the U.N. has approved a fair blueprint spelling out what must be done. It is consistent with our resolutions and our values, and it must be enforced


Remarks on Senate Action on Permanent Normal Trade Relations With China and an Exchange With Reporters
September 19, 2000

The President. Well, first I want to—I really do want to see what is the considered market judgment about the recent OPEC move, and I don't think we've seen it yet. It's been sort of complicated by speculations about Iraq, about speculations about what the refinery capacity is, and some uncertainty, still, about how much oil is on the seas now based on production


Remarks on Presenting the Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights and the Presidential Medal of Freedom
December 6, 2000

In Bosnia, he smuggled in enough equipment to build two water purification plants under snipers' noses, providing clean drinking water for 60 percent of the city during the worst days of the siege. General Shalikashvili called him "the hero" of our operations to help starving Kurds in Northern Iraq.


Remarks at the University of Nebraska at Kearney, Nebraska
December 8, 2000

Part of the challenge is just to get rid of as many weapons of mass destruction as possible. That's why we got the states of the former Soviet Union outside Russia to give up their nuclear arsenals, and we negotiated a worldwide treaty to ban chemical weapons. That's why we forced Iraq to sell its oil for money that can go to food and medicine, but not to rebuilding its weapons. And I think the other countries of the world that are willing to let them spend that money rebuilding their weapons systems are wrong. And I hope that we can strengthen the resolve of the world not to let Saddam Hussein rebuild the chemical weapons network and other weapons systems that are bad.


Exchange With Reporters Aboard Air Force One
December 14, 2000

It's like in the Middle East. Now, I think pursuing our interests involves having a good relationship with the Saudis and, insofar as we can, the other oil producers, except for Iraq, where I just don't think—I think they're still unreconstructed


Remarks at an Armed Forces Tribute to the President in Arlington, Virginia
January 5, 2001

Thanks to you, Iraq has not regained the capability that threatened the world or its neighbors with weapons of mass destruction. Thanks to you, Haiti is free of dictators; East Timor free of oppression; Africa is beginning to prepare itself to solve more of its own problems; Latin America has been aided in natural disasters and against narcotraffickers; and the United States has led the world in removing more landmines than any other nation by far, without sacrificing the safety and security of our troops in battle


Interview With Mark Knoller of CBS Radio in Dover, New Hampshire
January 11, 2001

The President. I wouldn't think so. That's why we did what we did on the classification. We have enough information that makes us believe that at least he survived his crash, at least that that's a possibility, and that he might be alive. And I thought, in fairness to his family and everyone else involved, based on a review of the information and the Defense Department's recommendation, we should change the status. But that's all we know, and I don't want to raise false hopes to either



Remarks on the 2001 Economic Report and an Exchange With Reporters
January 12, 2001

The President. Well, we're working on that. Let me just say to all of you, I agreed with the decision to take his name off the killed in action list and put it on the missing in action list. I think it was theright decision. But I do not want to raise false hopes here. We do not have hard evidence that he is alive. 
We have some evidence that what had been assumed to be the evidence that he was lost in action is not so. And we're going to do our best to find out if he is alive, and if he is, to get him out—because as a uniformed service person, he should have been released by now if he is alive.


The President's News Conference With President Vicente Fox of Mexico in San Cristobal, Mexico
February 16, 2001

President Bush. In answer to part B of your question, the United States is engaged in the Middle East and Persian Gulf. We will remain so. Since 1991, our country has been enforcing what's called a no-fly zone. A routine mission was conducted to enforce the no-fly zone, and it is a mission about which I was informed and I authorized. But I repeat, it is a routine mission, and we will continue to enforce the no-fly zone until the world is told otherwise

President Bush. Mr. Fournier, Saddam Hussein has got to understand that we expect him to conform to the agreement that he signed after Desert Storm. We will enforce the no-fly zone, both south and north. Our intention is to make sure that the world is as peaceful as possible. And we're going to watch very carefully as to whether or not he develops weapons of mass destruction, and if we catch him doing so, we'll take the appropriate action.

President Bush. The commanders on the ground, rightly, make the decision as to how to enforce the no-fly zone. I want to assure those who don't understand U.S. policy that this is a routine mission. Some of the missions require the Commander in Chief to be informed. This was such a mission. It is not the first time it has happened, regrettably so. 
We will continue to enforce the no-fly zones. The no-fly zones are enforced on a daily basis. It is a part of a strategy, and until that strategy is changed, if it is changed at all, we will continue to enforce the no-fly zone

The President's News Conference
February 22, 2001
The President. We're reviewing all policy in all regions of the world, and one of the areas we've been spending a lot of time on is the Persian Gulf and the Middle East. The Secretary of State is going to go listen to our allies as to how best to effect a policy, the primary goal of which will be to say to Saddam Hussein, we won't tolerate you developing weapons of mass destruction, and we expect you to leave your neighbors alone. 
I have said that the sanction regime is like Swiss cheese. That meant that they weren't very effective. And we're going to review current sanction policy and review options as to how to make the sanctions work. But the primary goal is to make it clear to Saddam that we expect him to be a peaceful neighbor in the region, and we expect him not to develop weapons of mass destruction. And if we find him doing so, there will be a consequence. 
We took action last week, and it may be on your mind as to that decision I made. The mission was twofold. One was to send him a clear message that this administration will remain engaged in that part of the world. I think we accomplished that mission. We got his attention. And secondly, the mission was to degrade his capacity to harm our pilots who might be flying in the no-fly zone. And we accomplished that mission, as well. 
Many nations in that part of the world aren't adhering to the sanction policy that had been in place, and as a result, a lot of goods are heading into Iraq that were not supposed to. And so, good sanction policy is one where the United States is able to build a coalition around the strategy.
The President. I—we had two missions. One was to send a clear signal to Saddam, and the other was to degrade the capacity of Saddam to injure our pilots. I believe we succeeded in both those missions. The bomb assessment damage report is ongoing, and I look forward to hear what the Pentagon has to say as they fully assess, completely assess the mission. And I will continue to listen to the commanders in the field. My job as Commander in Chief is to get input from the commanders in the field, and we will do everything needed to protect our pilots, to protect the men and women who wear the uniform

The President. We're concerned about the Chinese presence in Iraq, and we are— my administration is sending the appropriate response to the Chinese. Yes, it's troubling that they'd be involved in helping Iraq develop a system that will endanger our pilots.


The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom at Camp David
February 23, 2001

President Bush. We spent a lot of time talking about our mutual interests in Iraq and the Persian Gulf, and from our perspective, as you know, I made the famous statement that our sanctions are like Swiss cheese. That means they're not very effective, and we're going to work together to figure out a way to make them more effective. 
But I think the Prime Minister and I both recognize that it is going to be important for us to build a consensus in the region to make the sanctions more effective. Colin Powell left today, after lunch, to move around the Middle East, collect thoughts and to listen, with a policy of strengthening our mission to make it clear to Saddam Hussein that he shall not terrorize his neighbors and not develop weapons of mass destruction
President Bush. Well, that's the work we've got to do. First, our beef is not with the people of Iraq; it's with Saddam Hussein. And secondly, any time anybody suffers in Iraq, we're concerned about it. And I would, however, remind you that Saddam's got a lot of oil money, and it would be helpful if he would apply it to helping his people. Having said that, to the extent that sanctions are hurting the Iraqi people, we're going to analyze that. 
The Prime Minister said something interesting, though. A change in sanctions should not in any way, shape, or form, embolden Saddam Hussein. He has got to understand that we are going to watch him carefully, and if we catch him developing weapons of mass destruction, we'll take the appropriate action. And if we catch him threatening his neighbors, we will take the appropriate action. A change in the sanction regime that is not working should not be any kind of signal whatsoever to him that he should cross any line of—and test our will, because we're absolutely determined to make that part of the world a more peaceful place by keeping this guy in check


Remarks at the Christening Ceremony for the U.S.S. Ronald Reagan in Newport News, Virginia
March 4, 2001

One of the ways we show the world we take our values seriously is to live by them ourselves. Our Nation cherishes freedom, but we do not own it. While it is the birthright of every American, it is also the equal promise of the religious believer in southern Sudan or an Iraqi farmer in the Tigress Valley or of a child born in China today. We help fulfill that promise not by lecturing the world but by leading it.


Remarks at a Celebration of Greek Independence Day
March 23, 2001

We respect the ancient influence of Greece, and we value its modern friendships. Greece and America have been allies in the great 20th century struggles against nazism, Soviet communism, and Iraqi aggression. Our two nations are bound by history, by trade, by mutual respect, by common ideals, and one of the world's most important alliances.


Remarks to the American Jewish Committee
May 3, 2001

I'm pleased to say that many countries in the region show considerable and improving respect for religious liberty—Morocco, Tunisia, Jordan, and Bahrain among them. But there are other regimes, not only in north Africa and the Middle East, whose disrespect for freedom of worship is seriously disturbing. Iraq murders dissident religious figures. Iran systematically maltreats Jews, Christians, and adherents of the Baha'i faith. The Burmese junta tortures adherents of Islam, Buddhism, and Christianity. Cuba monitors and harasses independent priests and ministers. Afghanistan's Taliban government has horrified the world with its disdain for fundamental human freedoms, epitomized by its destruction of ancient Buddhist works of art. And the newly independent republics of central Asia impose troubling limits on religious expression and missionary work. We view with special concern the intensifying attacks on religious freedom in China.


Remarks Announcing the Energy Plan in St. Paul, Minnesota
May 17, 2001

Where oil is found underneath sensitive landscapes, rigs can stand miles away from the oil field and tap a reservoir at an angle. In Arctic sites like ANWR, we can build roads of ice that literally melt away when summer comes, and the drilling then stops to protect wildlife. ANWR can produce 600,000 barrels of oil a day for the next 40 years. What difference does 600,000 barrels a day make? Well, that happens to be exactly the amount we import from Saddam Hussein's Iraq


Remarks at the Iowa Energy Center in Nevada, Iowa
May 17, 2001

But it also means interesting new opportunities such as biomass, and that's why we've come here. I can't think of anything better for national security than to replace barrels of oil that come into the country from nations that can't stand America— some of them don't—with products that we grow here in America. I can't think of— I would much rather replace oil from Iraq with corn products from Iowa, and it's getting within our reach.


Remarks at the Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation in Conestoga, Pennsylvania
May 18, 2001

I think it's very important for our country to realize what Spence talked about, and that is the need to make sure we diversify our energy supplies. It's important to do so for national security reasons, for starters. As I mentioned yesterday in Iowa—we went to a place that was doing research on biomass and value-added processing, and I said to the folks there, I said, "I would much rather have our economy powered by crops grown in Iowa than barrels of oil coming out of Iraq." It's in our Nation's interest that we diversify. It's in our Nation's interest that we become less dependent upon nations, some of which really don't care for what we believe in. And I believe we can do so

People have got to understand that it's possible that we could find, and likely find, 600,000 barrels of oil a day out of ANWR. That's what we import from Saudi—I mean, from Iraq. It makes sense, folks, for us to have an environmentally sensitive exploration plan in America in order to diversify supply, not only for national security reasons but for international reasons, as well.


Commencement Address at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland
May 25, 2001

Today, nearly one-third of our naval forces are forward-deployed overseas. The U.S.S. Constellation carrier battle group and its 10,000 sailors are plying the waters of the Persian Gulf, enforcing the no-fly zone over southern Iraq. Another 3,800 sailors and marines stand guard nearby with the Boxer amphibious ready group, deterring any mischief Saddam might contemplate. The U.S.S. Enterprise is in the Mediterranean, along with the Kearsarge amphibious ready group. They're supporting NATO efforts to maintain peace in the Balkans and deterring those who would break the peace. And in the Pacific, the U.S.S. Kitty Hawk is on call, ready, if needed, to defend America's interests


Exchange With Reporters During a Round of Golf With Former President George Bush in Kennebunkport
July 6, 2001

We left some—you know, I told him I'd stay in touch with him. I want to talk to him about Iraq. So to answer your question, yes, I'm going to talk to him about Iraq. I'm going to talk to him about the Balkans, Macedonia. I know it's on his mind; it's on my mind, as well. And I look forward to listening to what he has to say. It'll just be a series of conversations we have over the summer


Remarks Prior to a Meeting With Virginia Gubernatorial Candidate Mark Earley and an Exchange With Reporters
July 26, 2001

The President. Well, we're going to keep the pressure on Iraq. The no-fly zone strategy is still in place. We are in—plus, I'm analyzing the data from the incident you talked about. I look forward to finding out all the facts. But there's no question that Saddam Hussein is still a menace and a problem. And the United States and our allies must put the pressure on him


Exchange With Reporters in Waco, Texas
August 7, 2001

The President. I've been briefed on it. As you know, our military can make decisions as they see fit to protect our pilots. Unless, of course, it's close to Baghdad, in which case it requires my approval. The missions that took place were fully in accordance with established allied war plans. 
As I said, Saddam Hussein is a menace. He's still a menace, and we need to keep him in check, and will. 
The President. No—are they, the Iraqis? He's been a menace forever, and we will do—he needs to open his country up for inspection, so we can see whether or not he's developing weapons of mass destruction.


Exchange With Reporters in Waco
August 8, 2001

The President. I've got a lot of national security concerns that we're working on— Iraq, Macedonia, very worrisome right now. Kind of a blowup last night, and yesterday it looked like we had a peaceful resolution. It's now in doubt. Urge all—we're urging all the parties to get back to the table and renounce the violence. The Secretary of Defense and I are working on some projects. There will be some announcements


Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the United States Response to the Terrorist Attacks of September 11
September 20, 2001

This war will not be like the war against Iraq a decade ago, with a decisive liberation of territory and a swift conclusion. It will not look like the air war above Kosovo 2 years ago, where no ground troops were used and not a single American was lost in combat.


The President's News Conference
October 11, 2001
We've been active for a month. I intend to be giving you a briefing for as long as I'm the President. I understand this is a unconventional war. It's a different kind of war. It's not the kind of war that we're used to in America. The greatest generation was used to storming beachheads; baby boomers, such as myself, were used to getting caught in a quagmire of Vietnam where politics made decisions more than the military sometimes; generation X was able to watch technology right in front of their TV screens—you know, burrow into concrete bunkers in Iraq and blow them up. This is a different kind of war that requires a different type of approach and a different type of mentality. 
As I mentioned, Helen, this is a long war against terrorist activity. And the doctrine I spelled out to the American people in front of Congress said not only will we seek out and bring to justice individual terrorists who cause harm to people, to murder people; we will also bring to justice the host governments that sponsor them, that house them and feed them. 
You mentioned Iraq. There's no question that the leader of Iraq is an evil man. After all, he gassed his own people. We know he's been developing weapons of mass destruction. And I think it's in his advantage to allow inspectors back in his country to make sure that he's conforming to the agreement he made, after he was soundly trounced in the Gulf war. And so we're watching him very carefully. We're watching him carefully. 

Remarks at a Welcoming Ceremony for Humanitarian Aid Workers Rescued From Afghanistan and an Exchange With Reporters
November 26, 2001
The President. Well, my message is, is that if you harbor a terrorist, you're a terrorist. If you feed a terrorist, you're a terrorist. If you develop weapons of mass destruction that you want to terrorize the world, you'll be held accountable. And I also have said, as I recall, at the White House, we're going to make sure that we accomplish each mission that we tackle. First things first. 
Now having said that, we—the coalition has arrested over 300 people. I can't wait to thank my friend President Aznar of Spain for having arrested eight terrorists in Spain. In other words, there is an international drag—international effort to bring people to justice. And over 300 people that have been involved with Al Qaida have been brought to justice. Terrorism is terrorism. In this country, we'll deal with it. 
The President. Saddam Hussein agreed to allow inspectors in his country. And in order to prove to the world he's not developing weapons of mass destruction, he ought to let the inspectors back in. 
Yes. 
The President. That's up for—he'll find out. 
The President. I stand by those words. Afghanistan is still just the beginning. If anybody harbors a terrorist, they're a terrorist. If they fund a terrorist, they're a terrorist. If they house terrorists, they're terrorists. I mean, I can't make it any more clearly to other nations around the world. If they develop weapons of mass destruction that will be used to terrorize nations, they will be held accountable. And as for Mr. Saddam Hussein, he needs to let inspectors back in his country to show us that he is not developing weapons of mass destruction. 

Remarks on the Celebration of Eid al-Fitr and an Exchange With Reporters
December 17, 2001
The President. Oh, no, I'm not going to tell the enemy what's next. They just need to know that so long as they plan, and have got plans to murder innocent people, America will be breathing down their neck.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit of Turkey and an Exchange With Reporters
January 16, 2002
President Bush. Iraqi policy? 
President Bush. Well, I'm going to have a discussion with the Prime Minister about Iraq. And my expectations, most importantly, are not from Turkey—are from Iraq. I expect Saddam Hussein to let inspectors back into the country. We want to know whether he's developing weapons of mass destruction. He claims he's not; let the world in to see. And if he doesn't, we'll have to deal with that at the appropriate time. 
My discussions with the Prime Minister are going to be not only regional in nature but global in nature. And I will assure him that we will consult closely with Turkey on any decisions that I make. Turkey is an ally and a friend, and no decisions have been made beyond the first theater. And the first theater is Afghanistan, and I do appreciate very much the Turkish support for our efforts in Afghanistan. 
President Bush. If he doesn't let them in? He'll find out. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 29, 2002
Our second goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction. Some of these regimes have been pretty quiet since September the 11th, but we know their true nature. 
Iraq continues to flaunt its hostility toward America and to support terror. The Iraqi regime has plotted to develop anthrax and nerve gas and nuclear weapons for over a decade. This is a regime that has already used poison gas to murder thousands of its own citizens, leaving the bodies of mothers huddled over their dead children. This is a regime that agreed to international inspections, then kicked out the inspectors. This is a regime that has something to hide from the civilized world. 
States like these and their terrorist allies constitute an axis of evil, arming to threaten the peace of the world. By seeking weapons of mass destruction, these regimes pose a grave and growing danger. They could provide these arms to terrorists, giving them the means to match their hatred. They could attack our allies or attempt to blackmail the United States. In any of these cases, the price of indifference would be catastrophic. 
We will work closely with our coalition to deny terrorists and their state sponsors the materials, technology, and expertise to make and deliver weapons of mass destruction. We will develop and deploy effective missile defenses to protect America and our allies from sudden attack. And all nations should know: America will do what is necessary to ensure our Nation's security. 
We'll be deliberate; yet, time is not on our side. I will not wait on events while dangers gather. I will not stand by as peril draws closer and closer. The United States of America will notpermit the world's most dangerous regimes to threaten us with the world's most destructive weapons. 
Our war on terror is well begun, but it is only begun. This campaign may not be finished on our watch; yet, it must be and it will be waged on our watch. We can't stop short. If we stop now, leaving terror camps intact and terrorist states unchecked, our sense of security would be false and temporary. History has called America and our allies to action, and it is both our responsibility and our privilege to fight freedom's fight. 

Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel and an Exchange With Reporters
February 7, 2002
President Bush. I'm sending the Vice President because, one, he is a key player in our administration, and I want to get feedback from the world, from the world leaders. I want them to see firsthand, as well, our strong intent to fight terror. 
There's nothing like looking somebody in the eye and letting them know that when we say we're going to fight terror, we mean it. And there's nothing like people getting a sense of the determination of this Government. There's a lot of folks who might have predicted that over time we would grow weary, and we'd get tired, and we'd kind of get faint of heart. The Vice President can deliver the message to many important world leaders that our Government is absolutely committed to fighting terror, and we expect people to join us in doing so. 
As I said, either you're with or you're against us. And we fully understand that in order to be effective in our fight against terror, that we need others to join us. And so the Vice President, I think, is going to be very effective at convincing—at convincing our friends we mean business. And we would hope that they would do everything in their power to shut off money, to deny haven, and to join this grand coalition dedicated to one thing, freedom and peace. 
As to whether or not we discussed other countries in the region: You bet. We discussed a lot of countries in the region, and we've had a very frank and open discussion. 

Remarks at a Fundraiser for Governor Scott McCallum of Wisconsin in Milwaukee
February 11, 2002
And are terrorists—and the threats to America not only are from the terrorist organizations that hate freedom and kill in the name of religion. Our mission also includes countries which develop weapons of mass destruction, nations with a history of brutality. If they're ever able to mate up with terrorist organizations, the free world will be threatened. And this President is notgoingtoallow regimes such as Iran, Iraq, and North Korea to threaten our way of life.

The President's News Conference With President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan
February 13, 2002
President Bush. Ron [Ron Fournier, Associated Press], I meant what I said the other night, that there are some nations in the world which develop weapons of mass destruction with one intention, and that is to hold America hostage and/or harm Americans and/or our friends and allies. And I also meant what I said, that I look forward to working with the world to bring pressure on those nations to change their behavior. But make no mistake about it, if we need to, we will take necessaryaction to defend the American people. 
And I think that statement was clear enough for Iraq to hear me, and I will reserve whatever options I have. I'll keep them close to my vest. President—or Saddam Hussein needs to understand I'm serious about defending our country. 
I think one of the worst things that can happen in the world is terrorist organizations mating up with nations which have had a bad history and nations which develop weapons of mass destruction. It would be devastating for those of us who fight for freedom. And therefore, we, the free world, are going to—must make it clear to these nations they've got a choice to make. And I'll keep all options available if they don't make the choice. 

Remarks Following a Roundtable Discussion on Small Business and an Exchange With Reporters in O'Fallon, Missouri
March 18, 2002
The President. I appreciate their advice, but we will notallow one of the world's most dangerous leaders to have the world's most dangerous weapons and hold the United States and our friends and allies hostage. That's just not going to happen. And so I appreciate their advice. But we will continue working with them. We will continue dialog. I have told people that we're a deliberate nation. We'll talk to our friends and allies. But what I said about the axis of evil is what I mean. I can't be any more plain about it.

Remarks Following a Breakfast Meeting With the Vice President and an Exchange With Reporters
March 21, 2002
The President. I think one other point that the Vice President made, which is a good point, is that this is an administration that when we say we're going to do something, we mean it; that we are resolved to fight the war on terror—this isn't a short-term strategy for us; that we understand history has called us into action, and we're not going to miss this opportunity to make the world more peaceful and more free. 
And the Vice President delivered that message. I was grateful that he was able to do so. It's very important for these leaders to understand the nature of this administration so there's no doubt in their mind that when we speak, we mean what we say, that we're not posturing. We don't take a bunch of polls and focus groups to tell us what—how to—to what we ought to do in the world. When we say we want to defend freedom, we mean it. And the Vice President did a fine job of delivering that message. 
Part of any foreign policy—good foreign policy—is to consult with our friends and allies. We've told our friends and allies we'll do so on all kinds of issues. And the Vice President did that in a really good way. 

The President's News Conference With President Vicente Fox of Mexico in Monterrey
March 22, 2002
President Bush. Let me put it to you this way, David [David Gregory, NBC News]: What we're telling our friends is that Saddam Hussein is a man who is willing to gas his own people, willing to use weapons of mass destruction against Iraq's citizens. Evidently, there's a new article in New York magazine or New Yorker magazine—some east coast magazine—and it details about his barbaric behavior toward his own people. And not only did he do it to his own people, he did it to people in his neighborhood. And this is a man who refuses to allow us to determine whether or not he still has weapons of mass destruction, which leads me to believe he does. He is a dangerous man who possesses the world's most dangerous weapons. And it is incumbent upon freedom-loving nations to hold him accountable, which is precisely what the United States of America will do. 
I haven't had a chance to explain this to our Mexican friends, but a nightmare scenario, of course, would be if a terrorist organization such as Al Qaida were to link up with a barbaric regime such as Iraq and thereby, in essence, possess weapons of mass destruction. We cannotallow that to happen. 
And so, David, what I've told others, including President Fox, is we have no imminent plans to use military operations. We'll be deliberate; we'll consult with our friends and allies. But we'll deal with Saddam Hussein. And he knows that. And this is exactly what I've been saying ever since I've been the President. 
President Bush. As I said, yes, we'd like to see a regime change in Iraq. That's been the longstanding policy of the U.S. Government. Nothing is new there. That's precisely what has been said since I became President of the United States. But close consultations with our friends from all around the world—and they—I think people have got a pretty good sense of how I view him. And I hope that, of course, he allows inspectors to go into his country, like he promised he would do, not for the sake of letting inspectors in but to showing the world that he has no weapons of mass destruction. 

Remarks to First-Responders in Greenville
March 27, 2002
I also want to explain right quickly what I meant when I was talking about the axis of evil. Let me put it to you this way: We cannotallow nations that have got a history of totalitarianism and dictatorship— a nation, for example, like Iraq, that poisoned her own people—to develop a weapon of mass destruction and mate up with terrorist organizations who hate freedom-loving countries. We can't afford to do that, for the sake of our children and our children's children. History has called this Nation into action, and we're not going to let the world's worst leaders develop and maintain and deploy and aim, at us or our friends, the world's worst weapons. 
My fellow Americans, we've got a lot at stake. We've got a lot at stake at home and a lot at stake around the world. We've been called, and I'm here to assure you this great country is prepared and willing and will answer the call to freedom. 

Interview With the United Kingdom's ITV Television Network
April 4, 2002
The President. I'll be talking a lot of things about Iraq with him, starting with the fact that we both recognize that Saddam Hussein is a dangerous man and he harbors and develops weapons of mass destruction—make no mistake about it—that he has got a variety of weapons that can harm mankind and he's not afraid to use them, including on his own people. 
And so we'll be discussing that, and we'll be discussing all options. I have no immediate plans to conduct military operations. But as one of my closest friends, personal friends amongst the world leaders, and one of my Nation's closest allies, of course we're going to discuss all options. 
The President. I made up my mind that Saddam needs to go. That's about all I'm willing to share with you. 
The President. That's what I just said. The policy of my Government is that he goes. 
The President. The worst thing that could happen would be to allow a nation like Iraq, run by Saddam Hussein, to develop weapons of mass destruction and then team up with terrorist organizations so they can blackmail the world. I'm not going to let that happen. 
The President. As I told you, the policy of my Government is that Saddam Hussein not be in power. 
The President. Wait and see. 
The President. I think the coalition can be assembled to demand that Iraq let inspectors back in, like she agreed to do right after the Gulf war. I don't know why the man won't let inspectors in. He's probably got something to hide, don't you think? 
And the idea of having this man, who is willing to murder his own people, have weapons of mass destruction—I'm not going to let that happen, and neither will the free world. So I'm confident that we can lead a coalition to pressure Saddam Hussein and to deal with Saddam Hussein. 
One thing Tony Blair does understand is that Saddam Hussein is a dangerous person. And I admire his courage for speaking the truth, and he speaks clearly about the truth. And that's one of the reasons why I like his advice and treasure his counsel. 
The President. Yes, of course. That's what he said he would do. 
The President. But this is not an issue of inspectors. This is an issue of him upholding his word that he would not develop weapons of mass destruction. 
The President. You keep trying to put— you're one these clever reporters that keeps trying to put words in my mouth. 
The President. Well, I'm afraid you do, sir. But nevertheless, you've had my answer on this subject. And I have no plans to attack on my desk. A policy of my Government is for Saddam not to be in office. It's in the interests of the free world that he not be in office, and it's in the interests of the free world that he notbeallowed to develop weapons of mass destruction. And the first thing is he must show us whether or not he has weapons of mass destruction, just like he promised he would do. 
The President. We've got a vast coalition for freedom right now. And I talk to leaders all the time, and of course, the subject of Iraq, amongst other subjects, comes up. And I explained to them precisely what I'm explaining to you. And most people understand that history has called us into action. History has given us an opportunity to fight for freedom, and we all willfight for freedom. 

Remarks on the Situation in the Middle East
April 4, 2002
Those governments, like Iraq, that reward parents for the sacrifice of their children are guilty of soliciting murder of the worst kind. All who care about the Palestinian people should join in condemning and acting against groups like Al-Aqsa, Hezbollah, Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and all groups which oppose the peace process and seek the destruction of Israel.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom in Crawford, Texas
April 6, 2002
President Bush. Adam, the Prime Minister and I, of course, talked about Iraq. We both recognize the danger of a man who's willing to kill his own people harboring and developing weapons of mass destruction. This guy, Saddam Hussein, is a leader who gasses his own people, goes after people in his own neighborhood with weapons of—chemical weapons. He's a man who obviously has something to hide. 
He told the world that he would show us that he would not develop weapons of mass destruction, and yet, over the past decade, he has refused to do so. And the Prime Minister and I both agree that he needs to prove that he isn't developing weapons of mass destruction. 
I explained to the Prime Minister that the policy of my Government is the removal of Saddam and that all options are on the table. 
President Bush. Maybe I should be a little less direct and be a little more nuanced, and say we support regime change. 
President Bush. No, it's really not. Regime change was the policy of my predecessor as well. 
President Bush. You know, I can't remember that far back. [Laughter] It's certainly the policy of my administration. I think "regime change" sounds a lot more civil, doesn't it? The world would be better off without him—let me put it that way, though—and so will the future. 
See, the worst thing that can happen is to allow this man to abrogate his promise and hook up with a terrorist network. And then all of a sudden you've got one of these shadowy terrorist networks that have got an arsenal at their disposal, which could create a situation in which nations down the road get blackmailed. We can't let it happen; we just can't let it happen. And obviously, the Prime Minister is somebody who understands this clearly, and that's why I appreciate dealing with him on the issue. And we've got close consultations going on, and we talk about it all the time. And he's got very good advice on the subject, and I appreciate that. 
President Bush. First of all, I wouldn't accept that. But can't they see linkage between somebody who's willing to murder his own people and the danger of him possessing weapons of mass destruction, which he said he would not develop? I see the linkage between somebody who is willing to go into his own neighborhood and use chemical weapons in order to keep himself in power and at the same time develop a weapon that could be aimed at Europe, aimed at Israel, aimed anywhere, in order to affect foreign policy through his—you know, I can't imagine people not seeing the threat and not holding Saddam Hussein accountable for what he said he would do, and we're going to do that. 
History has called us into action. The thing I admire about this Prime Minister is, he doesn't need a poll or a focus group to convince him the difference between right and wrong. And it's refreshing to see leaders speak with moral clarity when it comes to the defense of freedom. 
I intend to speak with clarity when it comes to freedom, and I know Prime Minister Tony Blair does as well. And we will hold Saddam Hussein accountable for broken promises. And that's what a lot of our discussion over there on Prairie Chapel Ranch has been about. And other than eating lunch, which we're fixing to go do, we're going to continue our discussions. 

Interview With the Wall Street Journal
April 8, 2002
The President. Here's my thoughts on that. One, it means that we need an energy policy that encourages diversification away from places like Iraq. You know, the ANWR debate has been amazing to watch because of the amount of misinformation that has been laid out there. But the reason I bring up ANWR is because it just so happens that once production is up and running on a very small footprint in the middle of this vast country, we can produce as much oil as Iraq produces on the world market. 
A good energy policy is one that obviously encourages conservation and new technologies but is also one that helps America diversify away from sources of crude oil in places like Iraq. And I—the first I heard of this, I said this is a—justifies more than ever the callfor exploration in areas where technology will allow us to do so in environmentally friendly ways. 
My other reaction is that Saddam Hussein is willing to cut off production even though it affects his own people. It helps define the nature of this regime. I've told people as I've made the case for— about my strong feelings about Iraq, that this is a person who is willing to poison his own people. Now it looks like he's willing to cut off revenues so that he can't feed his own people. Anyway, I'm not— I mean, axis of evil. 
The President. Well, I wouldn't call it a friendly gesture. It is—you know, this is a man who obviously hates America. And he's not just affecting America, by the way; it's affecting countries—all countries. If, in fact, his action has the—is able to run the price of crude up, it's going to affect Europe; it's going to affect poor nations; it's going to affect poor people around the world. This is a guy who has tried to manipulate the market for short-term gain for the wrong reason, is a person who is unfriendly to all nations, as far as I'm concerned.
The President. Well, not necessarily. 
The President. I wouldn't—you made— repeat your question. I think you made a pretty strong assumption in your question. 
The President. No, what did you just say, though—seriously, I'm not being critical. I'm just curious. Again, you just said my plans for Iraq have been placed on hold? 
The President. Iraq is a problem, and again, another reason why it's a problem, we witnessed today. And we are constantly talking with our friends and allies about Iraq. I spent a great deal of time this weekend talking to Tony Blair about Iraq. As I've said, all options are on the table for Iraq, and that's about all I've—pretty much about all I'm going to say. I don't know what you meant by—— 
The President. You see, I assume from your question that we're not really thinking about Iraq now, that somehow, because the Middle East has flared up, any thought about Iraq or keeping a coalition together on Iraq—— 
The President. Well, I mean, we're looking at all options. And Iraq is an important country. By the way, chasing down the Al Qaida killers is still a priority, even though the Middle East has flared up. I'm in no hurry on a lot of issues. I'm a patient man; I'm a deliberate person. I understand we live in a world where people are constantly saying, "Gosh, after 6 months, how come this isn't over?" Some people say that; most Americans don't feel that. They understand that we're in the long, long pull. So you've got to put everything in context. 
And the way I am, I'm a deliberate, patient man when it comes to conducting this war, thorough war, to defend our freedom. And I have said publicly that the idea of an Al Qaida terrorist network hooking up or matching up with or allied with—let me start over—"allied with," I think, is a more understandable word—a nation that has developed a weapon of mass destruction is a scenario that I will not leave our children saddled with, in other words. 
And again, my timeframe is longer rather than shorter. In other words, the fact that we haven't proved whether or not Saddam—or bin Laden is alive or dead or— he may be dead, may be alive, that fact just simply doesn't bother me. Because if he is alive, we're going to get him eventually, and if he's dead, that's fine, too. 
But we're making progress there, just quietly, steadily making progress. Abu Zubaydah is a very good example; for those of you who follow the Al Qaida network, you understand the significance of an Abu Zubaydah capture. And anyway, I don't know if I answered your question properly. In other words, it almost implied that things have to be immediate on all fronts; otherwise, there's not a focus. And that's just not the case. 
The President. That's one of those hypotheticals. [Laughter] I'm not going to—— 
But one thing is for certain: The fact that people are concerned points up the fact that we had better do something for the good of our country in terms of diversification of supply away from sources of crude oil in places like Iraq.
Remarks at a Republican Luncheon in Greenwich, Connecticut
April 9, 2002
I have mentioned a couple of the issues that we've worked on, education and tax relief. But there's a lot to do in Washington. We need an energy policy, an energy policy on the one hand that enhances conservation, that unleashes the technology of the country to enable our cars to run cleaner, our plants to burn cleaner. But we need to explore more, too. We need to be less dependent on foreign sources of crude oil. This was made pretty clear the other day when Saddam Hussein stands up and announces he's going to try to organize an oil boycott. You know my opinion about Saddam. [Laughter] The world's not going to follow him. But it just goes to show how important it is to diversify our supply away from places like Iraq.

Remarks at Vandenberg Elementary School in Southfield
May 6, 2002
I want to thank the parents who are involved in their children's education. I got to tell you, I was impressed. It just reminded me how great America is when I came—went through the classrooms here. A young girl, just came from Iraq, reads— talks about core democratic values and why they're important. I mean, this is a great country, and it's a great—public schools are so important that we get it right. In order for the future of this country to be bright and hopeful, we've got to make sure every child gets educated, no matter where they're from or their background. 
The reason I'm here is because this is a successful school. It's a successful school because teachers care and work hard. It's a successful school because there is a mindset that says, every child can learn. It is a school that obviously welcomes people from all backgrounds, but it is also a school that doesn't kind of say, "Well, certain kids are going to be too hard to educate. Let's just kind of move them somewhere else, kind of put them on the sidecar to nowhere," which happens. This is a school that welcomes the young child from Iraq, puts her in a classroom, provides a little special nudge when it comes to an interpreter, but gets her moving. 

Interview With European Journalists
May 21, 2002
The President. Sure. I'm a patient man. And I am a deliberate man. But the word "contain" doesn't work if someone's got the capacity to deliver a weapon of mass destruction. How can you contain somebody when they've got the ability to blackmail or launch a weapon? And that is my deep concern. 
And I feel passionate about this concern, because I know the nature of the regime. And I know the potential threat that could come if this terrorist organization that we're hunting down teams up with—I'm not sure how you translate into German, but—— 
The President. ——coordinate, allies with, coordinates with—uses these weapons of mass destruction to further their means as well. And I'm concerned about it. 
I know there's a lot of angst about my statements about these nations, but I have the responsibility to speak as clearly as I possibly can about how I view the nature of these regimes. And I will continue doing that. 
The President. Well, we certainly hope that the Iraq Government will allow there to be full and open and unfettered inspections. We want to know. This is a man who's denied inspections for years. I wonder why. I think the world ought to ask, why won't you allow for inspections? 
Every time they talk about inspections, he's got a certain kind of caveats and strings, and won't let them—"You can't go here. You can't go there." So I think the Vice President was expressing some skepticism about the nature of the regime itself. And we'd like to see inspections, unfettered, whole, free inspections. We'd like these inspectors to go look where they want to look, just like Saddam Hussein agreed to do over a decade ago. 

Interview With Christian Malar of TF-3 French Television
May 21, 2002
I do believe there is an axis of evil. These are countries that are not transparent; they're dictatorial; they've got designs for weapons of mass destruction, if they don't have them already. They hate— they preach a gospel of hate. And we'll deal with each of them differently. Obviously, the military is an option. I have no plans on my desk right now, but whatever I decide and whatever we decide, of course, we'll consult closely with the French, our allies, and our friends. 
But we must deal with this threat, the threat of countries such as Iraq using a weapons of mass destruction to affect a balance of power or to affect our willingness and ability to go defend ourselves. And this is a dangerous problem that we've got to deal with. 

Interview With Claus Kleber of ARD German Television
May 21, 2002
The President. Well, first, let me say this, that Iraq ought to be on the minds of the German people, and they ought to be on the minds of the American people, because the Iraq Government is a dangerous Government. Iraq ought to be centerpiece in our thinking. 
This is a Government that's gassed its own people. This is a Government that is not transparent, and this is a Government we know wants to develop weapons of mass destruction. They may have weapons of mass destruction; we just don't know. This is a dangerous regime. And for the good of freedom and for the good of our future, we've got to deal with it. 
The President. One way or the other, absolutely. 
Now, I'm not going to—I have no military plans on my desk that calls for—that plots out a military operation. I'm looking at all options. And of course, I'll consult closely with our allies and friends. I look forward to talking this subject with the Chancellor of Germany. I will be very blunt in my assessment of his—"his" being Saddam Hussein's—threat to the freedom of the world. 
But this is a threat that we better take seriously, and we better take it seriously now. 

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder of Germany in Berlin
May 23, 2002
President Bush. First, what the Chancellor told you is true. 
President Bush. I'm surprised anybody would doubt your word, Chancellor. [Laughter] 
Yes, look, I mean, he knows my position, and the world knows my position about Saddam Hussein. He is a dangerous man. He is a dictator who gassed his own people. He's had a history of incredible human rights violations. And he is a—it's dangerous to think of a scenario in which a country like Iraq would team up with an Al Qaida-type organization, particularly if and when they had the capacity—had the capacity, or when they have the capacity to deliver weapons of mass destruction via ballistic missile. And that's a threat. It's a threat to Germany; it's a threat to America; it's a threat to civilization itself. And we've got to deal with it. We can play like it's not there. We can hope it goes away. But that's not going to work. That's not going to make us safer. 
And I told the Chancellor that I have no war plans on my desk, which is the truth, and that we've got to use all means at our disposal to deal with Saddam Hussein. And I appreciate the German Chancellor's understanding of the threats of weapons of mass destruction, and they're real. Now, I know some would play like they're not real. I'm telling you: They're real. And if you love freedom, it's a threat to freedom. And so we're going to deal with it, and we'll deal with it in a respectful way. 
The Chancellor said that I promised consultations. I will say it again: I promise consultations with our close friend and ally. We will exert a unified diplomatic pressure. We will share intelligence. We love freedom and so does the Chancellor, and we cannotallow these weapons to be in a position that will affect history. 
Listen, history has called us to action. I don't want to be in a position where we look back, and say, "Why didn't they lead? Where were they when it came to our basic freedoms?" And we are going to lead. 

The President's News Conference With President Jacques Chirac of France in Paris, France
May 26, 2002
President Bush. Okay. Whew, a lot of questions here. Let me start with the Iraqi regime. The stated policy of my Government is that we have a regime change. And as I told President Chirac, I have no war plans on my desk. And I will continue to consult closely with him. We do view Saddam Hussein as a serious, significant—serious threat to stability and peace.

Exchange With Reporters at Fort Meade, Maryland
June 4, 2002
The President. Well, I think you need to read my speech that I gave at West Point. If you haven't, I'll get you—— 
The President. Oh. I think you need to have listened to my speech I gave at West Point. [Laughter] 
No, the war on terror is—and my strong desire to protect our homeland is of paramount importance to me. And I think people understand my position on these closed regimes that harbor and desire to have weapons of mass destruction. And as I said in my speech, we'll use all the tools at our disposal to deal with these nations that hate America and hate our freedoms. And one option, of course, is the military option, but as we've said repeatedly, I have no plans on my desk at this point in time. But nevertheless, these nations that I have named need to take—they need to take America seriously. When it comes to defending our freedoms, they need to be worried about how we defend our freedom. We're very serious about this, and we expect them to change their behavior. 

Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister John Howard of Australia and an Exchange With Reporters
June 13, 2002
President Bush. Yes, I told the Prime Minister there are no war plans on my desk. I haven't changed my opinion about Saddam Hussein, however. He is—this is a person who gassed his own people and possesses weapons of mass destruction. And so, as I told the American people and I told John, we'll use all tools at our disposal to deal with him. And of course, before there is any action—military action—I would closely consult with our close friend. But there are no plans on my desk right now.

Remarks on the Middle East
June 24, 2002
I've said in the past that nations are either with us or against us in the war on terror. To be counted on the side of peace, nations mustact. Every leader actually committed to peace will end incitement to violence in official media and publicly denounce homicide bombings. Every nation actually committed to peace will stop the flow of money, equipment, and recruits to terrorist groups seeking the destruction of Israel, including Hamas, Islamic Jihad, and Hezbollah. Every nation actually committed to peace must block the shipment of Iranian supplies to these groups and oppose regimes that promote terror, like Iraq. And Syria must choose the right side in the war on terror by closing terrorist camps and expelling terrorist organizations.

The President's News Conference
July 8, 2002
The President. Somebody else thinks they are, evidently. [Laughter] 
The President. Yes. 
The President. It's the stated policy of this Government to have regime change. And it hasn't changed. And we'll use all tools at our disposal to do so. 
I actually didn't read the whole story about somebody down there at level five flexing some know-how muscle, but there's all kind—listen, I recognize there's speculation out there. But people shouldn't speculate about the desire of the Government to have a regime change. And there's ways, different ways to do it. 
The President. I'm involved. I mean, I'm involved in the military planning, diplomatic planning, financial planning, all aspects of—reviewing all the tools at my disposal. And—but in my remarks to American people, I remind them I'm a patient person and there's a—but I do firmly believe that the world will be safer and more peaceful if there's a regime change in that Government. 
The President. That's hypothetical. 
The President. That's a hypothetical question. They can expect me not to answer hypothetical questions. 
The President. On sensitive subjects. [Laughter] 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With King Abdullah II of Jordan and an Exchange With Reporters
August 1, 2002
President Bush. Well, I appreciate that, John [John Cochran, ABC News]. The policy of my Government, our Government, of this administration, is regime change— for a reason. Saddam Hussein is a man who poisons his own people, who threatens his neighbors, who develops weapons of mass destruction. And I will assure His Majesty, like I have in the past, we're looking at all options, the use of all tools. I'm a patient man, but I haven't changed my opinion since the last time he was in the Oval Office. And one of the things we will do is consult with our friends, but he just needs to know how I feel. He knows how I feel, I have had the opportunity and the honor of explaining that to him before. And he'll find out I haven't changed my mind.

Exchange With Reporters in Prout's Neck
August 3, 2002
The President. No. You heard what I said in there. I'm a patient man. I'll use all the tools at our disposal. Nothing's changed

Exchange With Reporters in Waco, Texas
August 10, 2002
The President. Well, I do. I'm in close consultations with my senior staff on a variety of subjects. As I said yesterday, I have no timetable for any of our policies as regards to Iraq. That—yesterday I spent time with my principal advisers on that subject, as well as others.
The President. I described them as the axis of evil once. I described them as an enemy until proven otherwise. They obviously, you know, desire weapons of mass destruction. I presume that he still views us as an enemy. I have constantly said that we owe it to our children and our children's children to free the world from weapons of mass destruction in the hands of those who hate freedom. This is a man who has poisoned his own people. I mean, he's had a history of tyranny. 
The President. Well, Stretch [Richard Keil, Bloomberg News], I think most people understand he is a danger. But as I've said in speech after speech, I've got a lot of tools at my disposal. And I've also said I am a deliberate person. And so I'm— we're in the process of consulting not only with Congress, like I said I do the other day, but with our friends and allies. And the consultation process is a positive part of really allowing people to fully understand our deep concerns about this man, his regime, and his desires to have weapons of mass destruction. 
The President. Well, I think that that presumes there's some kind of imminent war plan. As I said, I have no timetable. What I do believe the American people understand is that weapons of mass destruction in the hands of leaders such as Saddam Hussein are very dangerous for ourselves, our allies. They understand the concept of blackmail. They know that when we speak of making the world more safe, we do so not only in the context of Al Qaida and other terrorist groups but nations that have proven themselves to be bad neighbors and bad actors. 

Remarks on the Baseball Labor Dispute and an Exchange With Reporters in Crawford
August 16, 2002
The President. Yes, I appreciate that question. First of all, I am aware that some very intelligent people are expressing their opinions about Saddam Hussein and Iraq. I listen carefully to what they have to say. 
There should be no doubt in anybody's mind, this man is thumbing his nose at the world, that he has gassed his own people, that he is trouble in his neighborhood, that he desires weapons of mass destruction. I will use all the latest intelligence to make informed decisions about how best to keep the world at peace, how best to defend freedom for the long run. 
We'll continue to consult. Listen, it's a healthy debate for people to express their opinion. People should be allowed to express their opinion. But America needs to know, I'll be making up my mind based upon the latest intelligence and how best to protect our own country, plus our friends and allies. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With the Secretary of Defense and an Exchange With Reporters in Crawford, Texas
August 21, 2002
The President. Well, look, if you're ask-ing—are you asking about Iraq? The subject didn't come up in this meeting. 
But having said that, we take all threats seriously, and we will continue to consult with our friends and allies. 
I know there is this kind of intense speculation that seems to be going on, a kind of a—I don't know how you would describe it. It's kind of a churning—— 
The President. Frenzy is how the Secretary would describe it. But the subject didn't come up. 
We will obviously continue to consult with our friends and allies. Your question makes certain assumptions that may or may not be true. But we will continue to talk with our—with the people concerned about peace and how to secure the peace, and those are needed consultations. 
The President. First of all, in the midst of the frenzy—[laughter]—I want you to note that General Franks is not here. General Franks is doing his job. And one of the jobs that the Secretary of Defense has tasked to members of his general staff is to prepare for all contingencies, whether it be in the particular country that you seem to be riveted on, or any other country, for that matter. 
We face a—the world is not stable. The world changes. There are—this terrorist network is global in nature, and they may strike anywhere. And therefore, we've got to be prepared to use our military and all the other assets at our disposal in a way to keep the peace. So General Franks is doing what the Secretary has asked. 
The President. Well, Adam, what I need to do is to continue to, as we call it, consult with people who share our interests to make the world a safer place, and I will do so. The American people know my position, and that is, is that regime change is in the interests of the world. How we achieve that is a matter of consultation and deliberative—deliberation, which I do; I'm a deliberate person. 
I say it in my speeches, which you fortunately don't have to cover, that I'm a patient man. And when I say I'm a patient man, I mean I'm a patient man, and that we will look at all options, and we will consider all technologies available to us and diplomacy and intelligence. 
But one thing is for certain, is that this administration agrees that Saddam Hussein is a threat, and he will be—that's a part of our thinking. And that hasn't changed. 
Nothing he has done has convinced me—I'm confident the Secretary of Defense—that he is the kind of fellow that is willing to forgo weapons of mass destruction, is willing to be a peaceful neighbor, that is—will honor the people—the Iraqi people of all stripes, will—values human life. He hasn't convinced me, nor has he convinced my administration. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
September 4, 2002
The President. First of all, I'll be giving a speech on Tuesday—or the 12th—and you can come and listen to it. But let me say to you that the issue is not inspectors; the issue is disarmament. This is a man who said he would not arm up. This is a man who told the world that he would not harbor weapons of mass destruction. That's the primary issue, and I'll be discussing ways to make sure that that is the case. 
The President. I will first remind the United Nations that for 11 long years, Saddam Hussein has sidestepped, crawfished, wheedled out of any agreement he had made not to harbor—not to develop weapons of mass destruction, agreements he's made to treat the people within his country with respect. And so I'm going to callupon the world to recognize that he is stiffing the world. And I will lay out and I will talk about ways to make sure that he fulfills his obligations. 
The President. I'm confident we will be able to—I'll be able to work with Congress to deal with this threat to the American people. And that's what I meant. 
The President. I am going to state clearly to the United Nations what I think. And I think that he has not fulfilled any of the obligations that he made to the world. And I believe it's important for the world to deal with this man. And I believe it's really important for the United States Congress to have an open dialog about how to deal with this threat. 
We are in a new era. The first battle of the—the first war of the 21st century took place in Afghanistan. The United States is under threats. We are—we spent a lot of time, people around this table, good-hearted people who care deeply about America spent a lot of time thinking about how best to secure our homeland even further. And this is a debate the American people must hear, must understand. And the world must understand as well that its credibility is at stake. 

Remarks at a Luncheon for Representative Anne M. Northup in Louisville
September 5, 2002

One of my jobs is to think ahead and to think—is to cause debate, and I started that yesterday, to encourage the American people to listen to and have a dialog about Iraq. And I meant it when I said that I'm going to consult with Congress. I want there to be an open discussion about the threats that face America. Tomorrow I'm calling leaders in Russia, China, and France to talk about the threats that face us all. I will see Tony Blair on Saturday. I will see Jean Chretien Monday. My point to you is, not only will I consult with Congress and talk to Congress—my administration and I will do so—I will also see many of the leaders of the world and remind them of the facts. The facts are, this is a man who gassed his own people, he's invaded two countries, a person who stiffed the international organization time and time again. 
I look forward to the debate. I look forward to the American people understanding the threats we face. But one thing is for certain: I'm not going to change my view, and it's this—and my view is, we cannot let the world's worst leaders blackmail America, threaten America, or hurt America with the world's worst weapons. 

Remarks to the Community in Louisville, Kentucky
September 5, 2002
And they understand one thing about us, too. When we need to be plenty tough, we're going to be plenty tough. And they're learning another thing about America. When we need to be compassionate and loving, we can be compassionate and loving, too. You see, I believe out of the evil done to America—and make no mistake, it was an incredibly evil act—will come incredible good. You need to tell your loved ones, the little ones in particular, that when they hear the President talking about Al Qaida, Iraq, and other places, I do so because I long for peace. See, I believe out of the evil done to America, if we're strong and focused and determined, we can achieve peace. We can not only achieve peace today for America but peace in the long term—but not only for America. See, every life matters in this country. And you don't have to be an American for you to matter, as far as this Nation is concerned. We want peace in parts of the world that have quit on peace. We want there to be peace in the Middle East. We want there to be peace in South Asia. We act because we believe in peace. And out of the evil done to America can come a more peaceful world. 


Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom and an Exchange With Reporters at Camp David, Maryland
September 7, 2002
President Bush. We just heard the Prime Minister talk about the new report. I would remind you that when the inspectors first went into Iraq and were denied—finally denied access, a report came out of the Atom-ic—the IAEA that they were 6 months away from developing a weapon. I don't know what more evidence we need. 
President Bush. Well, first, I'm going to give a speech next Thursday, and I'd like you to tune in. 
President Bush. Well, as you know, our Government in 1998—action that my administration has embraced—decided that this regime was not going to honor its commitments to get rid of weapons of mass destruction. The Clinton administration supported regime change. Many members of the current United States Senate supported regime change. My administration still supports regime change. There's all kinds of ways to change regimes. 
This man is a man who said he was going to get rid of weapons of mass destruction. And for 11 long years, he has not fulfilled his promise. And we're going to talk about what to do about it. We owe it to future generations to deal with this problem, and that's what these discussions are all about. 
President Bush. Yes. A lot of people understand that this man has defied every U.N. resolution—16 U.S. resolutions he's ignored. A lot of people understand he holds weapons of mass destruction. A lot of people understand he has invaded two countries. A lot of people understand he's gassed his own people. A lot of people understand he is unstable. So we've got a lot of support. A lot of people understand the danger. 


Address to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 12, 2002
In one place—in one regime—we find all these dangers in their most lethal and aggressive forms, exactly the kind of aggressive threat the United Nations was born to confront. 
Twelve years ago, Iraq invaded Kuwait without provocation, and the regime's forces were poised to continue their march to seize other countries and their resources. Had Saddam Hussein been appeased instead of stopped, he would have endangered the peace and stability of the world. Yet this aggression was stopped by the might of coalition forces and the will of the United Nations. 
To suspend hostilities, to spare himself, Iraq's dictator accepted a series of commitments. The terms were clear to him and to all, and he agreed to prove he is complying with every one of those obligations. He has proven instead only his contempt for the United Nations and for all his pledges. By breaking every pledge, by his deceptions, and by his cruelties, Saddam Hussein has made the case against himself. 
In 1991, Security Council Resolution 688 demanded that the Iraqi regime cease at once the repression of its own people, including the systematic repression of minorities, which the Council said threatened international peace and security in the region. This demand goes ignored. 
Last year, the U.N. Commission on Human Rights found that Iraq continues to commit extremely grave violations of human rights and that the regime's repression is all-pervasive. Tens of thousands of political opponents and ordinary citizens have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, summary execution, and torture by beating and burning, electric shock, starvation, mutilation, and rape. Wives are tortured in front of their husbands, children in the presence of their parents, and all of these horrors concealed from the world by the apparatus of a totalitarian state. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolutions 686 and 687, demanded that Iraq return all prisoners from Kuwait and other lands. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this promise. Last year, the Secretary-General's high-level coordinator for this issue reported that Kuwaiti, Saudi, Indian, Syrian, Lebanese, Iranian, Egyptian, Bahraini, and Omani nationals remain unaccounted for—more than 600 people. One American pilot is among them. 
In 1991, the U.N. Security Council, through Resolution 687, demanded that Iraq renounce all involvement with terrorism and permit no terrorist organizations to operate in Iraq. Iraq's regime agreed. It broke this promise. In violation of Security Council Resolution 1373, Iraq continues to shelter and support terrorist organizations that direct violence against Iran, Israel, and Western governments. Iraqi dissidents abroad are targeted for murder. In 1993, Iraq attempted to assassinate the Amir of Kuwait and a former American President. Iraq's Government openly praised the attacks of September the 11th, and Al Qaida terrorists escaped from Afghanistan and are known to be in Iraq. 
In 1991, the Iraqi regime agreed to destroy and stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles and to prove to the world it has done so by complying with rigorous inspections. Iraq has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge. 
From 1991 to 1995, the Iraqi regime said it had no biological weapons. After a senior official in its weapons program defected and exposed this lie, the regime admitted to producing tens of thousands of liters of anthrax and other deadly biological agents for use with Scud warheads, aerial bombs, and aircraft spray tanks. U.N. inspectors believe Iraq has produced 2 to 4 times the amount of biological agents it declared and has failed to account for more than 3 metric tons of material that could be used to produce biological weapons. Right now, Iraq is expanding and improving facilities that were used for the production of biological weapons. United Nations inspections also revealed that Iraq likely maintains stockpiles of VX, mustard, and other chemical agents and that the regime is rebuilding and expanding facilities capable of producing chemical weapons. 
And in 1995, after 4 years of deception, Iraq finally admitted it had a crash nuclear weapons program prior to the Gulf war. We know now, were it not for that war, the regime in Iraq would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later than 1993. 
Today, Iraq continues to withhold important information about its nuclear program, weapons design, procurement logs, experiment data, an accounting of nuclear materials, and documentation of foreign assistance. Iraq employs capable nuclear scientists and technicians. It retains physical infrastructure needed to build a nuclear weapon. Iraq has made several attempts to buy high-strength aluminum tubes used to enrich uranium for a nuclear weapon. Should Iraq acquire fissile material, it would be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. And Iraq's state-controlled media has reported numerous meetings between Saddam Hussein and his nuclear scientists, leaving little doubt about his continued appetite for these weapons. 
Iraq also possesses a force of Scud-type missiles with ranges beyond the 150 kilometers permitted by the U.N. Work at testing and production facilities shows that Iraq is building more long-range missiles, that it can inflict mass death throughout the region. 
In 1990, after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the world imposed economic sanctions on Iraq. Those sanctions were maintained after the war to compel the regime's compliance with Security Council resolutions. In time, Iraq was allowed to use oil revenues to buy food. Saddam Hussein has subverted this program, working around the sanctions to buy missile technology and military materials. He blames the suffering of Iraq's people on the United Nations, even as he uses his oil wealth to build lavish palaces for himself and to buy arms for his country. By refusing to comply with his own agreements, he bears full guilt for the hunger and misery of innocent Iraqi citizens. 
In 1991, Iraq promised U.N. inspectors immediate and unrestricted access to verify Iraq's commitment to rid itself of weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles. Iraq broke this promise, spending 7 years deceiving, evading, and harassing U.N. inspectors before ceasing cooperation entirely. Just months after the 1991 ceasefire, the Security Council twice renewed its demand that the Iraqi regime cooperate fully with inspectors, condemning Iraq's serious violations of its obligations. The Security Council again renewed that demand in 1994 and twice more in 1996, deploring Iraq's clear violations of its obligations. The Security Council renewed its demand three more times in 1997, citing flagrant violations, and three more times in 1998, calling Iraq's behavior totally unacceptable. And in 1999, the demand was renewed yet again. 
As we meet today, it's been almost 4 years since the last U.N. inspectors set foot in Iraq, 4 years for the Iraqi regime to plan and to build and to test behind the cloak of secrecy. 
We know that Saddam Hussein pursued weapons of mass murder even when inspectors were in his country. Are we to assume that he stopped when they left? The history, the logic, and the facts lead to one conclusion: Saddam Hussein's regime is a grave and gathering danger. To suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of millions and the peace of the world in a reckless gamble. And this is a risk we must not take. 
Delegates to the General Assembly, we have been more than patient. We've tried sanctions. We've tried the carrot of oil for food and the stick of coalition military strikes. But Saddam Hussein has defied all these efforts and continues to develop weapons of mass destruction. The first time we may be completely certain he has a— nuclear weapons is when, God forbids, he uses one. We owe it to all our citizens to do everything in our power to prevent that day from coming. 
The conduct of the Iraqi regime is a threat to the authority of the United Nations and a threat to peace. Iraq has answered a decade of U.N. demands with a decade of defiance. All the world now faces a test and the United Nations a difficult and defining moment. Are Security Council resolutions to be honored and enforced or cast aside without consequence? Will the United Nations serve the purpose of its founding, or will it be irrelevant? 
The United States helped found the United Nations. We want the United Nations to be effective and respectful and successful. We want the resolutions of the world's most important multilateral body to be enforced. And right now those resolutions are being unilaterally subverted by the Iraqi regime. Our partnership of nations can meet the test before us by making clear what we now expect of the Iraqi regime. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately and unconditionally forswear, disclose, and remove or destroy all weapons of mass destruction, long-range missiles, and all related material. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all support for terrorism and act to suppress it, as all states are required to do by U.N. Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will cease persecution of its civilian population, including Shi'a, Sunnis, Kurds, Turkomans, and others, again as required by Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will release or account for all Gulf war personnel whose fate is still unknown. It will return the remains of any who are deceased, return stolen property, accept liability for losses resulting from the invasion of Kuwait, and fully cooperate with international efforts to resolve these issues, as required by Security Council resolutions. 
If the Iraqi regime wishes peace, it will immediately end all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food program. It will accept U.N. administration of funds from that program, to ensure that the money is used fairly and promptly for the benefit of the Iraqi people. 
If all these steps are taken, it will signal a new openness and accountability in Iraq. And it could open the prospect of the United Nations helping to build a government that represents all Iraqis, a government based on respect for human rights, economic liberty, and internationally supervised elections. 
The United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi people. They've suffered too long in silent captivity. Liberty for the Iraqi people is a great moral cause and a great strategic goal. The people of Iraq deserve it; the security of all nations requires it. Free societies do not intimidate through cruelty and conquest, and open societies do not threaten the world with mass murder. The United States supports political and economic liberty in a unified Iraq. 
We can harbor no illusions, and that's important today to remember. Saddam Hussein attacked Iran in 1980 and Kuwait in 1990. He's fired ballistic missiles at Iran and Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Israel. His regime once ordered the killing of every person between the ages of 15 and 70 in certain Kurdish villages in northern Iraq. He has gassed many Iranians and 40 Iraqi villages. 
My Nation will work with the U.N. Security Council to meet our common challenge. If Iraq's regime defies us again, the world must move deliberately, decisively to hold Iraq to account. We will work with the U.N. Security Council for the necessary resolutions. But the purposes of the United States should not be doubted. The Security Council resolutions will be enforced, the just demands of peace and security will be met, or action will be unavoidable. And a regime that has lost its legitimacy will also lose its power. 
Events can turn in one of two ways. If we fail to act in the face of danger, the people of Iraq will continue to live in brutal submission. The regime will have new power to bully and dominate and conquer its neighbors, condemning the Middle East to more years of bloodshed and fear. The regime will remain unstable—the region will remain unstable, with little hope of freedom, and isolated from the progress of our times. With every step the Iraqi regime takes toward gaining and deploying the most terrible weapons, our own options to confront that regime will narrow. And if an emboldened regime were to supply these weapons to terrorist allies, then the attacks of September the 11th would be a prelude to far greater horrors. 
If we meet our responsibilities, if we overcome this danger, we can arrive at a very different future. The people of Iraq can shake off their captivity. They can one day join a democratic Afghanistan and a democratic Palestine, inspiring reforms throughout the Muslim world. These nations can show by their example that honest government and respect for women and the great Islamic tradition of learning can triumph in the Middle East and beyond. And we will show that the promise of the United Nations can be fulfilled in our time. 
Neither of these outcomes is certain. Both have been set before us. We must choose between a world of fear and a world of progress. We cannot stand by and do nothing while dangers gather. We must stand up for our security and for the permanent rights and the hopes of mankind. By heritage and by choice, the United States of America will make that stand. And delegates to the United Nations, you have the power to make that stand as well. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Central African Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters in New York City
September 13, 2002
The President. I am highly doubtful that he'll meet our demands. I hope he does, but I'm highly doubtful. The reason I'm doubtful is, he's had 11 years to meet the demands. For 11 long years he has basically told the United Nations and the world he doesn't care. And so, therefore, I am doubtful but, nevertheless, made the decision to move forward to work with the world community. And I hope the world community knows that we're extremely serious about what I said yesterday and we expect a quick resolution to the issue. And that's starting with quick action on a resolution. 
The President. As soon as possible. 
The President. Well, there will be deadlines within the resolution. Our chief negotiator for the United States, our Secretary of State, understands that we must have deadlines. And we're talking days and weeks, not months and years. And that's essential for the security of the world. This man has had 11 years to comply. For 11 long years, he's ignored world opinion, and he's put the credibility of the United Nations on line. 
As I said yesterday, we'll determine— how we deal with this problem will help determine the fate of a multilateral body, which has been unilaterally ignored by Saddam Hussein. Will this body be able to keep the peace and deal with the true threats, including threats to security in Central Africa and other parts of the world, or will it be irrelevant? 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and an Exchange With Reporters at Camp David, Maryland
September 14, 2002
President Bush. That's a very interesting question. Why don't you interpret the question? He stiffed the world 16 times, why does he get another chance? 
First of all, the United Nations deserves another chance to prove its relevance. See, we're entering a new world. Wars of the future are not going to be like wars of the past. We fight these terrorists that hide in caves and send their youngsters to suicidal death. They strike America, but they're likely to strike Italy. They hate freedom. They also are willing and want to work with countries like Iraq to develop the capacity to deliver weapons of mass destruction. And therefore, the international community must work together to prevent this from happening. 
So this is a chance for the United Nations to show some backbone and resolve, as we confront the true challenges of the 21st century. It's a chance for the United Nations to show its relevance, and that's why I gave the speech I gave. But make no mistake about it, if we have to deal with the problem, we'll deal with it. 

The President's Radio Address
September 14, 2002
Good morning. Today I'm meeting with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi about the growing danger posed by Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq and the unique opportunity the U.N. Security Council has to confront it. 
I appreciate the Prime Minister's public support for effective international action to deal with this danger. The Italian Prime Minister joins other concerned world leaders who have called on the world to act, among them Prime Minister Blair of Great Britain, Prime Minister Aznar of Spain, President Kwasniewski of Poland. 
These leaders have reached the same conclusion I have, that Saddam Hussein has made the case against himself. He has broken every pledge he made to the United Nations and the world since his invasion of Kuwait was rolled back in 1991. Sixteen times the United Nations Security Council has passed resolutions designed to ensure that Iraq does not pose a threat to international peace and security. Saddam Hussein has violated every one of these 16 resolutions, not once but many times. 
Saddam Hussein's regime continues to support terrorist groups and to oppress its civilian population. It refuses to account for missing Gulf war personnel or to end illicit trade outside the U.N.'s oil-for-food program. And although the regime agreed in 1991 to destroy and stop developing all weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles, it has broken every aspect of this fundamental pledge. 
Today, this regime likely maintains stockpiles of chemical and biological agents and is improving and expanding facilities capable of producing chemical and biological weapons. Today, Saddam Hussein has the scientists and infrastructure for a nuclear weapons program and has illicitly sought to purchase the equipment needed to enrich uranium for a nuclear weapon. Should his regime acquire fissile material, it would be able to build a nuclear weapon within a year. 
The former head of the U.N. team investigating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction program, Richard Butler, reached this conclusion after years of experience: "The fundamental problem with Iraq remains the nature of the regime itself. Saddam Hussein is a homicidal dictator who is addicted to weapons of mass destruction." 
By supporting terrorist groups, repressing its own people, and pursuing weapons of mass destruction in defiance of a decade of U.N. resolutions, Saddam Hussein's regime has proven itself a grave and gathering danger. To suggest otherwise is to hope against the evidence. To assume this regime's good faith is to bet the lives of millions and the peace of the world in a reckless gamble. And this is a risk we must not take. 
Saddam Hussein's defiance has confronted the United Nations with a difficult and defining moment: Are Security Council resolutions to be honored and enforced, or cast aside without consequence? Will the United Nations serve the purposes of its founding, or will it be irrelevant? 
As the United Nations prepares an effective response to Iraq's defense, I also welcome next week's congressional hearings on the threats Saddam Hussein's brutal regime poses to our country and the entire world. Congress must make it unmistakably clear that when it comes to confronting the growing danger posed by Iraq's efforts to develop or acquire weapons of mass destruction, the status quo is totally unacceptable. 
The issue is straightforward: We must choose between a world of fear or a world of progress. We must stand up for our security and for the demands of human dignity. By heritage and choice, the United States will make that stand. The world community must do so as well. 

Remarks to Employees of Sears Manufacturing Company in Davenport, Iowa
September 16, 2002
I gave a speech to the United Nations, talking about Iraq and making it crystal clear to the United Nations that Saddam poses an international problem. This is a man who poisoned his own people, poisoned his neighbors. He's invaded two countries. He signed agreements that said he would develop no weapons of mass destruction, wouldn't hold any weapons of mass destruction. Yet, for 11 years, he's totally ignored what he said he would do. He basically told the United Nations, "Your deals don't mean anything to me." 
I told the United Nations, it can show us whether or not it's going to serve its purpose to help keep the peace, or whether it's going to be irrelevant. We, of course, want the United Nations to be relevant. We want them to be a part of a framework of peace as we head into the 21st century. But I also made it clear, this, that unless there's action from the nations at the United Nations, that that's not satisfactory as far as the United States is concerned. And if Iraq regimes continues to defy us and the world, we will move deliberately yet decisively to hold Iraq to account. 
We owe this to our children. We must anticipate. Somebody said, "Well, you know, they don't have a nuclear weapon." I said, "Well, the most dangerous thing"— and we know they're trying to get one— "the most dangerous thing would be to find out they had a nuclear weapon after they developed one." 

Remarks at East Literature Magnet School in Nashville
September 17, 2002
You've got to understand there are some in this world that simply do not adhere to the ideals we believe in. In Iraq, they don't put their hand over their heart and say, "Liberty and justice for all." They don't believe in liberty. The dictator who runs Iraq doesn't believe in justice. He only believes in liberty and justice for those who he decides get liberty and justice. 
There's a lot of talk about Iraq on our TV screens, and there should be, because we're trying to figure out how best to make the world a peaceful place. There's an old saying in Tennessee—I know it's in Texas, probably in Tennessee—that says, fool me once, shame on—shame on you. Fool me— you can't get fooled again. You've got to understand the nature of the regime we're dealing with. This is a man who has delayed, denied, deceived the world. For the sake of liberty and justice for all, the United Nations Security Council mustact, mustact in a way to hold this regime to account, must not be fooled, must be relevant to keep the peace. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
September 18, 2002
We also talked about Iraq. We talked about the fact that Saddam Hussein has stiffed the United Nations for 11 long years and that, once again, he said—made some kind of statement, trying to take the pressure off of himself. This statement about unconditional inspections was something he's made in the past. He deceives. He delays. He denies. And the United States and, I'm convinced, the world community, aren't going to fall for that kind of rhetoric on—by him again.
The President. Oh, all they've got to do is look at the record. It's his latest ploy, his latest attempt not to be held accountable for defying the United Nations. He's not going to fool anybody. I mean, he is— we've seen him before. And we'll remind the world that by defying the United Nations he is becoming more and more threat to world peace. And I'm convinced that the world understands the ploy. And one of the jobs the United States has is to remind people about not only the threat but the fact that his defiance has weakened the United Nations. And the United Nations, in order for the world to be a more peaceful place, must rise up and deal with this threat and hold him to account. And that's what we expect out of the Security Council. 
The President. Listen, we're speculating about what nations are going to do. I'm convinced that when we continue to make the case about his defiance, his deception, his—the fact that time and time again, dozens of times, he has told the world, "Oh, I will comply," and he never does—that the nations which long for peace and care about the validity of the United Nations will join us. 
And so we're going to work hard to continue to make the case. I think reasonable people understand this man is unreasonable. And reasonable people understand that this is just a ploy; this is a tactic; this is a way to try to say to the world, "Oh, I'm a wonderful, peaceful fellow," when, in fact, he not only kills his own people, he's terrorized his neighborhood, and he's developing weapons of mass destruction. We must deal with him.

Remarks Following a Visit With Homeland Security Employees and an Exchange With Reporters
September 19, 2002
The President. I didn't hear it, but let me guess: "The United States is guilty. The world doesn't understand. We don't have any weapons of mass destruction." It's the same old song and dance that we've heard for 11 long years. And the United Nations Security Council must show backbone, must step up and hold this regime to account. Otherwise, the United States and some of our friends will do so. 
For the sake of peace, for the sake of world security, for the sake of a viable United Nations, they mustact. And if they don't have it in their will to do so, if they're not willing to fashion a resolution which is new and different and strong and holds Iraq to account, holds them to the agreements they have made, the United States will be willing to do so. 
The President. The American people must understand the serious threat which Iraq places on America. We've learned after September the 11th that oceans no longer protect us from an enemy. We also know full well this is a man who has invaded two countries; this is a man who has poisoned his own people; this is man who's poisoned his neighbors; this is a man who says that Stalin is his hero; this is a man who hates; this is a man who doesn't believe in freedom; this is a man who has weapons of mass destruction and says he doesn't. He poses a serious threat to the American people. And the first step is to get the United Nations to prove to the world whether it's going to be relevant or whether it's going to be a League of Nations, irrelevant

Remarks at the Republican Governors Association Fall Reception
September 19, 2002
I also made it clear, for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom for our country, if the United Nations will not act, the United States and our friends will. We owe it to our children; we owe it to our grandchildren to make sure that the dictator in Iraq never threatens our country or our children or our children's children with the world's worst weapons.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and an Exchange With Reporters
September 19, 2002
President. Good morning. I appreciate our Secretary of State coming by to brief the Vice President and me and Condoleezza Rice about our progress in working with the United Nations, convincing the United Nations Security Council to firmly deal with a threat to world peace. 
At the United Nations Security Council, it is very important that the members understand that the credibility of the United Nations is at stake; that the Security Council must be firm in its resolve to deal with a true threat to world peace, and that is Saddam Hussein; that the United Nations Security Council must work with the United States and Britain and other concerned parties to send a clear message that we expect Saddam to disarm. And if the United Nations Security Council won't deal with the problem, the United States and some of our friends will. That's the message the Secretary of State has delivered forcefully. That's the message that he will continue to carry. 
The President. Well, I haven't gotten a report from what he intends to say. But let me give you just some general observations. First of all, there are nonegotiations to be held with Iraq. They have nothing to negotiate. They're the people who said that they would not have weapons of mass destruction. The negotiations are over. It is up to the U.N. Security Council to lay out resolutions that confirms what Iraq has already agreed to, see. 
Secondly, I don't trust Iraq, and neither should the free world. For 11 years, they have deceived the world. They have said, "We'll conform to resolutions." They've never conformed to resolutions. They've never conformed to the agreement that they laid out 11 years ago. Sixteen times they've defied Security resolutions. 
And so, they—the burden of proof is— must be placed squarely on their shoulders. But there's nonegotiations about whether or not they've been telling the truth or not. 
The President. That will be part of the resolution, the authorization to use force. If you want to keep the peace, you've got to have the authorization to use force. But it's—this will be—this is a chance for Congress to indicate support. It's a chance for Congress to say, "We support the administration's ability to keep the peace." That's what this is all about. 
The President. Yes. That's the policy of the Government. 

Remarks to the Community in Trenton, New Jersey
September 23, 2002
And that's why I went into the United Nations the other day. And I said to the United Nations: "We have a true threat that faces America, a threat that faces the world, and a threat which diminishes your capacity. And I'm talking about Iraq. That country has got a leader which has attacked two nations in the neighborhood; a leader who has killed thousands of people; a leader who is brutal"—see, remember, we believe every life matters and every life is precious—"a leader, if there is dissent, will kill the dissenter, a leader who told the United Nations and the world he would not develop weapons of mass destruction, and for 11 long years has stiffed the world." 
He looked at the United Nations and said, "This is a paper tiger. Their resolutions mean nothing." For 11 years he has deceived and denied. For 11 years he's claimed he has had no weapons; and yet, we know he has. 
But I also told them that if they would not act, if they would not deal with this true threat we face in America—if they would not recognize that America is no longer protected by oceans and that this man is the man who would use weapons of mass destruction at the drop of a hat, a man who would be willing to team up with terrorist organizations with weapons of mass destruction to threaten America and our allies—if they wouldn't act, the United States will. We will notallow the world's worst leaders to threaten us with the world's worst weapons. 
I want to see strong resolutions coming out of that U.N., a resolution which says the old ways of deceit are gone, a resolution which will hold this man to account, a resolution which will allow freedom-loving countries to disarm Saddam Hussein before he threatens his neighborhood, before he threatens freedom, before he threatens America, and before he threatens civilization. We owe it to our children, and we owe it to our grandchildren to keep this Nation strong and free. 

Remarks at a Luncheon for Senatorial Candidate Doug Forrester in Trenton
September 23, 2002
And we're dealing with a man in Iraq who has done a couple of things that I remind you about. One, he gassed his own people with weapons of mass destruction. He has invaded two countries since 1980. He's a man who told the United Nations time and time and time again, "I will disarm. I don't have weapons." He lied or deceived. He has made that body look weak. For the sake of peace, the United Nations must make a decision as to whether or not it's going to be a debating society, like the League of Nations, or have the capacity to keep the peace. It's their choice to make. It is their choice to make. 
There are nonegotiations with Saddam Hussein about what he should or should not do. He's already said what he would do. The negotiations—the discussion is within the United Nations Security Council, and soon they will tell the world whether or not they're going to be relevant or whether or not they're going to be weak. For the sake of world peace, I hope they're relevant. However, for the sake of freedom and peace, if the United Nations will not deal with Saddam Hussein, the United States and our friends will. 

Remarks Following a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
September 24, 2002
The President. That might explain why. 
The President. Explain why he didn't put new information—to protect sources. Go ahead. 
The President. I'm confident that a lot of Democrats here in Washington, DC, understand that Saddam is a true threat to America. And I look forward to working with them to get a strong resolution passed. 
Prime Minister Blair, first of all, is a very strong leader, and I admire his willingness to tell the truth and to lead. Secondly, he has—continues to make the case, like we make the case, that Saddam Hussein is a threat to peace, that for 11 years he has deceived the world. For 11 years he's ignored the United Nations, and for 11 years he has stockpiled weapons. And we shouldn't deceive ourselves about this man. He has poisoned his people before. He has poisoned his neighborhood. He is willing to use weapons of mass destruction. And the Prime Minister continues to make the case, and so will I. 
And I again callfor the United Nations to pass a strong resolution holding this man to account. And if they're unable to do so, the United States and our friends will act, because we believe in peace. We want to keep the peace. We don't trust this man, and that's what the Blair report showed today. 
The reason why it wasn't specific is because—I understand why—he's not going to reveal sources and methods of collection of sensitive information. Those sources and methods may be—will be used later on, I'm confident, as we gather more information about how this man has deceived the world. 
The President. I just responded. I mean, there's a lot of Democrats in Washington, DC, who understand that Saddam Hussein is a true threat and that we must hold him to account. And I believe you'll see, as we work to get a strong resolution out of the Congress, that a lot of Democrats are willing to take the lead when it comes to keeping the peace. 

Remarks at a Reception for Senatorial Candidate John R. Thune
September 24, 2002
It also stands that we must notallow leaders who develop the world's worst weapons to blackmail the United States or our friends and allies, to hold us hostage. I went to the United Nations because I want the United Nations to have heard not only the case about Saddam Hussein—the fact that he has weapons of mass destruction, the fact that he gassed his own people, the fact that he terrorized his neighborhood, the fact that he has terrorized his own people much worse than Mr. Milosevic did. I also made it clear to the United Nations, we want, for the sake of peace, for the United Nations to be an effective body. We don't want it to be a League of Nations. We want it to be a body that can—that has got the backbone necessary to keep the peace. I'm willing to work with nations in the United Nations to not only strengthen that institution but to hold Saddam Hussein to account. 
But if the United Nations won't act, if they won't disarm Saddam Hussein, if they won't expose this liar for what he is, then the United States and other friends of ours around the world will do just that. We owe it to our children, and we owe it to our children's children. 
And I want to thank Members of both parties in the United States Congress for working to develop a strong resolution and strong signal to the world that this Nation is determined. We love peace. Military is not our first choice. But nevertheless, we will not let the challenges that we face go unheeded. We understand the reality. We understand the nature of the man with which we deal. Everybody matters. Every life counts, including those who have been tortured and killed and suppressed in Iraq. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia and an Exchange With Reporters
September 25, 2002
President Bush. That's a—that is a interesting question. I'm trying to think of something humorous to say—[laughter]— but I can't when I think about Al Qaida and Saddam Hussein. They're both risks. They're both dangerous. The difference, of course, is that Al Qaida likes to hijack governments. Saddam Hussein is a dictator of a government. Al Qaida hides; Saddam doesn't. But the danger is, is that they work in concert. The danger is, is that Al Qaida becomes an extension of Saddam's madness and his hatred and his capacity to extend weapons of mass destruction around the world. 
Both of them need to be dealt with. The war on terror—you can't distinguish between Al Qaida and Saddam when you talk about the war on terror. And so it's a comparison that is—I can't make because I can't distinguish between the two, because they're both equally as bad and equally as evil and equally as destructive. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders
September 26, 2002
We are engaged in a deliberate and civil and thorough discussion. We are moving toward a strong resolution. And all of us, and many others in Congress, are united in our determination to confront an urgent threat to America. And by passing this resolution, we'll send a clear message to the world and to the Iraqi regime: The demands of the U.N. Security Council must be followed; the Iraqi dictator must be disarmed. These requirements will be met, or they will be enforced. 
The danger to our country is grave. The danger to our country is growing. The Iraqi regime possesses biological and chemical weapons. The Iraqi regime is building the facilities necessary to make more biological and chemical weapons. And according to the British Government, the Iraqi regime could launch a biological or chemical attack in as little as 45 minutes after the order were given. 
The regime has longstanding and continuing ties to terrorist organizations, and there are Al Qaida terrorists inside Iraq. The regime is seeking a nuclear bomb and, with fissile material, could build one within a year. Iraq has already used weapons of mass death against—against other countries and against her own citizens. The Iraqi regime practices the rape of women as a method of intimidation and the torture of dissenters and their children. 
For more than a decade, the regime has answered Security Council resolutions with defiance, bad faith, and deception. We know that the Iraqi regime is led by a dangerous and brutal man. We know he's actively seeking the destructive technologies to match his hatred. We know he must be stopped. The dangers we face will only worsen from month to month and from year to year. To ignore these threats is to encourage them. And when they have fully materialized, it may be too late to protect ourselves and our friends and our allies. By then the Iraqi dictator would have the means to terrorize and dominate the region. Each passing day could be the one on which the Iraqi regime gives anthrax or VX—nerve gas—or, someday, a nuclear weapon to a terrorist ally. We refuse to live in this future of fear. Democrats and Republicans refuse to live in a future of fear. We're determined to build a future of security. All of us long for peace, peace for ourselves, peace for the world. 

Remarks at a Reception for Senatorial Candidate John Cornyn in Houston, Texas
September 26, 2002
And we've also got some other tasks ahead of us as well. I went to the United Nations the other day to make a case about a true threat to freedom, a true threat to the United States, a threat to Israel, a threat to peace in the region. And that is Iraq. 
But the United Nations, in the face of Saddam Hussein, has not been effective. For 11 long years he's defied them. He's wheedled out of agreements. He's deceived. He's lied. The question before the United Nations is, "Will you be the League of Nations, or will you be an effective body to keep the peace?" That's my challenge to them. 
I also challenged—I also have made it clear that Saddam Hussein must disarm. There's nonegotiations. Those ended a long time ago. There's no need for us to try to sit down at a table. There's no discussion to be had. He's got chemical weapons; he needs to get rid of them, all of them. He's got biological weapons; he needs to destroy all of them. There's no doubt in my mind he wants to have a nuclear weapon, and he's got some capacity. I'm not saying he's got one yet, but he's developing the capacity, as we learned right after Desert Storm. He needs to get rid of it— no discussion,no debate,  nonegotiation. The burden of proof is on Saddam Hussein. 
And so now it's up to the United Nations and it's up to Saddam Hussein to determine whether or not there will be peace, to determine whether or not the world's worst leader—and remember, this is a guy who continues to torture his people if they dissent. This is a man who's gassed his own people. This is a man who attacked two countries in the neighborhood. This is a man who used gas on a neighbor. This is a man who continually lies. This is a man who does not know the truth. This is a man who is a threat to peace. It's up to the United Nations and it's up to him to decide their fate. If the United Nations won't act, if he doesn't disarm, the United States will lead a coalition to make sure he does.

Remarks at a Luncheon for Congressional Candidate Bob Beauprez in Denver, Colorado
September 27, 2002
There's not going to be an easy road to secure our freedom. There is going to be—there are some steep hills to climb. But we're ready to climb them as a nation, I think. There's a steep hill to climb in Iraq. I went to the United Nations the other day, and I want to share with you why I went. First, I wanted to make sure the world heard the case: This man is a dictator who tortures and rapes women— has women raped in order to make a point; who kills, stifles dissent through murder; the man who said he would get rid of weapons of mass destruction and still has them. And we need to fear the fact that he has weapons of mass destruction. He's used them before. He's used them on his own people before. He's invaded two countries. He's lied and deceived the world. 
The United States is no longer secure because we've got oceans. We're vulnerable to attack, as we learned so vividly. My job is to not only deal with problems—people kind of run around and lurk—my job is also to anticipate problems. My job is to be realistic about our future. My job is to make sure that the world's worst leader is not able to blackmail or hurt America or our friends and allies with the world's worst weapons. We've got to make sure that these dictators aren't able to team up with terrorist groups, use their weapons of mass destruction as a way to intimidate those of us who love freedom. 
So I went to the United Nations. My message was, "We want you to succeed as an organization. We remember what it was like when the collective body was the League of Nations, unable to stop totalitarianism, that in order to secure the freedom in the 21st century, it's important to have an effective body. But you've been ineffective," I said. "For 11 long years you have said one thing to the dictator in Iraq, and he has thumbed his nose. For 11 years you've allowed this man to be—to lie and deceive about weapons of mass destruction, and you have not held him to account. And now is the time. For the sake of freedom, you have got a choice: You can hold him to account. And for the sake of freedom, he has got a choice: He can disarm." 
There's nonegotiations, by the way, for Mr. Saddam Hussein. There's nothing to discuss. He either gets rid of his weapons and the United Nations gets rid of his weapons—he can either get rid of his weapons and the United Nations can act, or the United States will lead a coalition to disarm this man. 
I'm willing to give peace a chance to work. I want the United Nations to work. I want him to do what he said he would do. But for the sake of our future, now's the time—now's the time. For the sake of your children's future, we must make sure this madman never has the capacity to hurt us with a nuclear weapon or to use the stockpiles of anthrax that we know he has, or VX—the biological weapons which he possesses. 

Remarks at a Rally for Congressional Candidate Rick Renzi in Flagstaff, Arizona
September 27, 2002
We've also got some other tasks, because there are some madmen in the world who have got weapons of mass destruction. We've got people who torture their own people. If there's dissent, they kill them. They've gassed their own people with weapons of mass destruction. The man in Iraq has attacked two countries. He lied to the world. He's deceived us. 
I went to the United Nations, and I said as clearly as I could: "In order for you to be an effective organization, you must deal with him. If you don't, we will lead a coalition which will." We cannotallow the world's worst leaders—[applause]. there's  nonegotiation. There's no discussion. This man must disarm like he said he would do. After 11 years of deceit, this man must disarm. 
For the sake of peace, for the sake of peace not only in our—in his neighborhood but in ours, he must disarm. And if he does not, it's his choice to make. It's his and the United Nations choice to make. Our last choice is to commit our troops to harm's way. But if we have to, to defend our freedoms, if we have to, the United States will lead a coalition and do so. 

The President's Radio Address
September 28, 2002
Good morning. On Thursday, I met with Democratic and Republican Members of Congress to discuss the threat posed by the Iraqi regime. The security of our country is the commitment of both political parties and the responsibility of both the President and the Congress. We are united in our determination to confront this urgent threat to America. 
We're moving toward a strong resolution authorizing the use of force, if necessary, to defend our national security interests against the threat posed by Saddam Hussein. And by passing this resolution, we will send a clear message to the world community and to the Iraqi regime: The demands of the United Nations Security Council must be followed; the Iraqi dictator must be disarmed. These requirements will be met, or they will be enforced. 
The danger to our country is grave, and it is growing. The Iraqi regime possesses biological and chemical weapons, is rebuilding the facilities to make more and, according to the British Government, could launch a biological or chemical attack in as little as 45 minutes after the order is given. The regime has longstanding and continuing ties to terrorist groups, and there are Al Qaida terrorists inside Iraq. This regime is seeking a nuclear bomb and with fissile material could build one within a year. 
Iraq has already used weapons of mass death against another country and against its own citizens. The Iraqi regime practices the rape of women, as a method of intimidation, and the torture of dissenters and their children. And for more than a decade, that regime has answered Security Council resolutions with defiance and bad faith and deception. 
We know that the Iraqi regime is led by a dangerous and brutal man. We know he is actively seeking the destructive technologies to match his hatred. And we know that he must be stopped. The dangers we face will only worsen from month to month and year to year. To ignore these threats is to encourage them, and when they have fully materialized, it may be too late to protect ourselves and our allies. By then, the Iraqi dictator will have had the means to terrorize and dominate the region, and each passing day could be the one on which the Iraqi regime gives anthrax or VX nerve gas or, someday, a nuclear weapon to a terrorist group. 
We refuse to live in this future of fear. We are determined to build a future of security and peace for ourselves and for the world. The Members of Congress from both political parties with whom I met this week arecommitted to American leadership for the good of all nations. The resolution we are producing will be an instrument of that leadership. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
October 1, 2002
The President. Well, I—first of all, I appreciate all the Members of Congress working to come up with a resolution. It sends a clear signal to the world that this country is determined to disarm Iraq and thereby bring peace to the world. Members of both parties are working to get a consensus. Secondly—and we'll continue to work with the Members of Congress. But I don't want to get a resolution which ties my hands, a resolution which is weaker than that which was passed out of the Congress in 1998. The Congress in 1998 passed a very strong resolution. They wisely recognized that Saddam Hussein is a threat—was a threat in '98, and he's more of a threat 4 years later. 
My question is, what's changed? Why would Congress want to weaken the resolution? This guy's had 4 years to lie, deceive, to arm up. He's had 4 years to thumb his nose at the world. He is stockpiling more weapons. So I'm not sure why Members would like to weaken the resolution. 
But we'll work with the Members, and I'm confident we can get something done. And we'll be speaking with one voice here in the country, and that's going to be important for the United Nations to hear that voice. It's going to be important for the world to hear that voice. All of us recognize a military option is not the first choice, but disarming this man is, because he faces a true threat to the United States. And we've just got to work together to get something done. 
The President. Of course, I haven't made up my mind we're going to war with Iraq. I've made up my mind we need to disarm the man. 
The President. What I will notaccept is something that allows Saddam Hussein to continue to lie, deceive the world. He's been doing that for 11 years. For 11 years, he's told the United Nations Security Council, "Don't worry. I accept your resolution." Then he doesn't follow through. And we're just not going to accept something that is weak. It is not worth it. It's— the United Nations must show its backbone. And we will work with members of the Security Council to put a little calcium there, put calcium in the backbone, so this organization is able to more likely keep the peace as we go down the road. 
The President. I'm suggesting that the same old stuff isn't going to work, John. And we will notaccept the status quo. There needs to be a strong new resolution in order for us to make it clear to the world— and to Saddam Hussein, more importantly—that you must disarm. 
And I look forward to looking at all their proposals. Just like we're dealing with everybody concerned, we will listen to points of view. But the final, bottom line has got to be a very strong resolution, so that we don't fall into the same trap we have done for the last 11 years, which is nothing happens. 
Saddam Hussein has thumbed his nose at the world. He's a threat to the neighborhood. He's a threat to Israel. He's a threat to the United States of America. And we're just going to have to deal with him. And the best way to deal with him is for the world to rise up and say, "You disarm, and we'll disarm you." And if not—if at the very end of the day nothing happens, the United States, along with others, will act.

Remarks Announcing Bipartisan Agreement on a Joint Resolution To Authorize the Use of United States Armed Forces Against Iraq
October 2, 2002
The text of our bipartisan resolution is clear, and it is strong. The statement of support from the Congress will show to friend and enemy alike the resolve of the United States. In Baghdad, the regime will know that full compliance with all U.N. security demands is the only choice and that time remaining for that choice is limited. 
On its present course, the Iraqi regime is a threat of unique urgency. We know the treacherous history of the regime. It has waged a war against its neighbors. It has sponsored and sheltered terrorists. It has developed weapons of mass death. It has used them against innocent men, women, and children. We know the designs of the Iraqi regime. In defiance of pledges to the U.N., it has stockpiled biological and chemical weapons. It is rebuilding the facilities used to make those weapons. 
U.N. inspectors believe that Iraq could have produced enough biological and chemical agent to kill millions of people. The regime has the scientists and facilities to build nuclear weapons and is seeking the materials needed to do so. 
We know the methods of this regime. They buy time with hollow promises. They move incriminating evidence to stay ahead of inspectors. They concede just enough to escape—to escape punishment and then violate every pledge when the attention of the world is turned away. 
We also know the nature of Iraq's dictator. On his orders, opponents have been decapitated and their heads displayed outside their homes. Women have been systematically raped as a method of intimidation. Political prisoners are made to watch their own children being tortured. The dictator is a student of Stalin, using murder as a tool of terror and control within his own cabinet, within his own army, even within his own family. We will not leave the future of peace and the security of America in the hands of this cruel and dangerous man. 
None of us here today desire to see military conflict, because we know the awful nature of war. Our country values life and never seeks war unless it is essential to security and to justice. America's leadership and willingness to use force, confirmed by the Congress, is the best way to ensure compliance and avoid conflict. Saddam must disarm—period. If, however, he chooses to do otherwise, if he persists in his defiance, the use of force may become unavoidable. 
The course of action may bring many sacrifices. Yet delay, indecision, and inaction could lead to a massive and sudden horror. By timely and resolute action, we can defend ourselves and shape a peaceful future. Together with the Congress, I will do everythingnecessary to protect and defend our country. 
In accepting this responsibility, we also serve the interests and the hopes of the Iraqi people. They are a great and gifted people, with an ancient and admirable culture, and they would not choose to be ruled by violence and terror. The people of Iraq are the daily victims of Saddam Hussein's oppression. They will be the first to benefit when the world's demands are met. Americans believe all men and women deserve to be free. And as we saw in the fall of the Taliban, men and women celebrate freedom's arrival. 
The United States will work with other nations. We'll work with other nations to bring Saddam to account. We'll work with other nations to help the Iraqi people form a just government and a unified country. And should force be required, the United States will help rebuild a liberated Iraq. 
Countering Iraq's threat is also a central commitment on the war on terror. We know Saddam Hussein has longstanding and ongoing ties to international terrorists. With the support and shelter of a regime, terror groups become far more lethal. Aided by a terrorist network, an outlaw regime can launch attacks while concealing its involvement. Even a dictator is not suicidal, but he can make use of men who are. We must confront both terror cells and terror states, because they are different faces of the same evil. 
I brought this issue to the attention of the world, and many, many countries share our determination to confront this threat. We're not alone. The issue is now before the United States Congress. This debate will be closely watched by the American people, and this debate will be remembered in history. We didn't ask for this challenge as a country, but we will face it, and we will face it together.

Remarks at a Reception for Gubernatorial Candidate Robert L. Ehrlich, Jr., in Baltimore, Maryland
October 2, 2002
And there's a grave threat in Iraq. There just is. This is a man who has gassed his own people, used weapons of mass destruction on his own citizens. Imagine what his intentions will be about a country that loves freedom like we do. This is a man who has attacked—and by the way, he used weapons of mass destruction in his own neighborhood, too, against countries on his border. This is a man who has attacked two countries in 22 years. This is a man who kills political dissenters in cold blood. This is a man who, 11 years ago, told the world that he would get rid of weapons of mass destruction, and yet, for 11 long years, he has defied resolution after resolution after resolution after resolution out of the United Nations. This is a man who would like nothing more than to team up with a terrorist network, a man who could use a terrorist network perhaps to use the weapons of mass destruction he's developed—and lies about—to harm countries that he can't stand—America, Israel, countries in his own—immediately around him. 
And therefore, I thought it was time for us to deal with him, for the sake of freedom. So I went to the United Nations. And my message to the United Nations was this: We want you to succeed as a international body. The world is different. The threats are real. We can do a better job if we work together through the United Nations, and here's your chance to succeed. You have a choice, and the choice is whether you'll be an effective peacekeeping organization or whether you'll be like the League of Nations—your choice. 
I also said to Mr. Saddam Hussein, "You said you would disarm—your choice to disarm." Military option is my last choice; it's not my first choice. This man should disarm, like he said. He should do what he said he would do. The United Nations should insist that he does what he said he would do. But for the sake of freedom and for the sake of peace, for the sake of a world that doesn't fear the world's worst leaders with the first world's weapons— with the world's worst weapons, this country will be deliberate, we'll work with others, but we will lead a coalition to disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks to Hispanic Leaders
October 3, 2002
And so we're making progress on that front of the war against terror. But there are other fronts on the war against terror that we must deal with. We must deal with countries run by people who are some of the world's worst leaders, who harbor, develop, want to hurt us with the world's worst weapons. That's a form of terror. 
The war on terror is more than just Al Qaida; the war on terror is to deal with nations who have terrorized their own people and have intention to terrorize us. See, oceans no longer protect us. There's a new era in America. There's a new threat that faces us. And we've got to deal with these threats. I made the decision to deal with these—the threat of Iraq in an international community. I've called upon other nations to join us, and there will be other nations joining us to help disarm Iraq. 
We'll determine whether or not the U.N. Security Council wants to live up to its obligations. After all, for 11 long years the dictator in Iraq, the man who has gassed his own people, gassed people in his neighborhood, the man who's expressly—expressed his hatred for America and our friends and allies—we'll see whether or not the United Nations will be the United Nations or the League of Nations when it comes to dealing with this man who for 11 years has thumbed his nose at resolution after resolution after resolution after resolution. 
My intent, of course, is for the United Nations to do its job. I think it'll make it easier for us to keep the peace. My intent is for the world to understand that the obligation is up to Saddam Hussein to disarm like he said he would do. My intent is to put together a vast coalition of countries who understand the threat of Saddam Hussein. 
The military option is my last choice, not my first; it's my last choice. But Saddam has got to understand, the United Nations must know, that the will of this country is strong. 
Yesterday I had the honor of standing on the steps of the White House, at the Rose Garden, with the Republican leader and Democrat leader alike—Speaker Hastert and Leader Gephardt, Trent Lott and Joe Lieberman, John McCain and Evan Bayh—Member after Member who has committed to join with the administration to send a clear signal that when it comes to defending our freedom, the United States of America will stand united and stand strong. 
The choice is up to the United Nations to show its resolve. The choice is up to Saddam Hussein to fulfill its word—his word. And if neither of them acts, the United States, in deliberate fashion, will lead a coalition to take away the world's worst weapons from one of the world's worst leaders. 

Remarks at a Reception for Gubernatorial Candidate Mitt Romney in Boston, Massachusetts
October 4, 2002
We've got a true threat facing us, a threat that faces our very homeland. And that is Saddam Hussein. And I want to explain to you about Saddam Hussein, just quickly, if I might. 
This is a man who has used weapons of mass destruction. He used them on his own people. He used them on his neighbors. 
This is a man who said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction, yet he does. This is a man who, 11 years ago, said he wouldn't harbor terrorists; he wouldn't develop chemical or biological weapons. This is a man who said he would free prisoners. He has lied and deceived and denied for 11 long years. 
This is a man who continues to torture people in his own country who disagree with him. He's a coldblooded killer. This is a man who I believe strongly thinks he can use terrorist networks to foster his own ambitions. This is a man who, when they went into Iraq the first time, it was discovered that he was a short period away from developing a nuclear weapon. 
This is a man who has invaded two countries. This is a man who is a threat—he's a threat to the United States; he's a threat to Israel; he's a threat to neighbors of his. He is a threat. 
My job is to protect the American people. My job is to anticipate. And so I went to the United Nations. I went to the United Nations because I want the United Nations to be effective. I went to the United Nations and—to remind them that for 11 years, this man has defied 16 resolutions. Time and time and time again, he has ignored the United Nations. I basically said, "You can be an effective body to help us keep the peace, or you can be the League of Nations." 
It's up to them. It's up to them. We will continue to work with our friends in the United Nations for peace, to deal with threats, to not ignore reality. I want the United Nations to be effective. I want them to do their job of disarming Saddam Hussein. 
The choice is theirs, and the choice is also Mr. Saddam Hussein's choice. There are nonegotiations. There's nothing to negotiate. He said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction, and that's what those of us who love peace expect. We expect him not to have weapons of mass destruction. 
But I want to tell you all, for the sake of our freedom, for the sake of peace, if the United Nations won't make the decision, if Saddam Hussein continues to lie and deceive, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm this man before he harms America and our friends. 
The military's not my first choice, but peace is; peace is my first choice. And we're not—what I just told you is a sentiment that's becoming more and more shared in Washington. I was honored this week to stand on the steps of the Rose Garden with Speaker Hastert, Minority Leader Gephardt, Leader Lott, Senator Lieberman, Senator McCain, Senator Bayh, just to name a few of both Republicans and Democrats who are coming together to speak with one voice, a voice out of concern for the future of our country and for the future of our friends. 

Remarks at a Reception for Senatorial Candidate John Sununu in Manchester
October 5, 2002
We've got some other tasks ahead as well to keep the peace and to make our country secure. And that of course is Iraq. There's now a national debate, one which I encourage, one which I think is helpful, a national debate on how best to keep the peace, how best to secure the homeland, whether or not we ought to deal with threats before they become so severe that we may never be able to deal with them. It's an important debate. 
Monday night I'll be giving a talk to the Nation about my take on the debate. I want to share some thought with you right quick, and it's this: The facts and the history of Iraq are pretty clear to me. This is a man who told the world he would not have weapons of mass destruction, your chemical, your biological or nuclear weapons. For 11 years he has lied. 
On the one hand, he said he wouldn't have them—he does. And remember, this is a guy who's used them. He not only has denied and deceived about possessing weapons; he's actually used the weapons of mass destruction. He's used the weapons of mass destruction against neighbors. He has used weapons of mass destruction against his own people. He hates America. He hates many of our friends. He hates Israel. He's a man who continues to kill his own people who might dissent. When the inspectors were able to go into the country and have unfettered access, it was discovered that he was a short period away from owning a nuclear weapon. 
This is a man, as I reminded them, who has looked the United Nations in the eye for 11 long years and has defied them. Sixteen times the Security Council passed resolution after resolution after resolution after resolution, and 16 times he defied them. 
I also have said as clearly as I can that this isn't an issue of inspectors. That's what the process-oriented people want. This is an issue of disarmament. This is a man who has said he would disarm. The United Nations said he must 16 times. He said he would, but he hasn't. The choice is his to make as well. And those choices will be made over time here. 
But for the sake of our peace, for the sake of our children's future, if the United Nations will not act in strong fashion, if they continue to be ineffective, if Saddam Hussein makes the choice not to disarm, the United States and a lot of our friends will disarm him. For the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, for the sake of our future and our children's future, we will disarm him. 
The use of our military is my last choice, not my first. I take my responsibilities very seriously as the Commander in Chief. The use of force is not my first choice; it's my last. But my first choice as well is not to allow the world's worst leader to blackmail, to harm America with the world's worst weapons. 

Remarks to the Community in Manchester, New Hampshire
October 5, 2002
Our job is to keep the peace. Our job is to make the world a more peaceful place. And sometimes it's a pretty steep hill to get there. Sometimes we're going to have to cross some hurdles. Sometimes we're going to have to anticipate problems before they become so acute that it will be difficult to keep the peace. One such area, where the Nation is now beginning an important national discourse, is with Iraq. This is a country which, 11 years ago, promised the world they would have no weapons of mass destruction. And yet, for 11 years they have lied and deceived the world community. This is a country run by one of the most brutal dictators in modern history. On Monday night, I will make the case to the country on TV yet again, but I want to share some of my thoughts with you here. 
I want you to remember that this is a man who kills his opponents in cold blood. This is a person who suppressed people. This is a person who has used weapons of mass destruction on his own citizens. This is a person who has used weapons of mass destruction on people in his neighborhood. This is a person who hates America and yet still possesses weapons of mass destruction. 
At one time, inspectors had a free hand in Iraq, like they should have, and they determined that had this man not been checked in the early nineties, he would have had possession of a nuclear weapon. He still wants to have a nuclear weapon. This is a man who has used weapons of mass destruction. This is a man who hates so much, he's willing to kill his own people, much less Americans. This is a man who would be a tremendous threat to world peace and security if he ever were to have and possess a weapon of mass destruction as devastating as a nuclear weapon. 
I went to the United Nations the other day because I wanted to make it clear, a couple of things. One, I want the United Nations to be successful. We face a new threat for world peace. We're dealing with these treacherous terrorist organizations who have designs and desires to hook up with nations such as Iraq that have developed weapons of mass destruction. See, old Saddam might not have to show up, but he might get a surrogate who could do it for him. 
Sixteen different times the United Nations, an important world body, has said, "You must disarm." Sixteen times, and he's defied them all 16 times. He's lied, and he's deceived. And so now the choice is the United Nations to make. The choice is also Mr. Saddam Hussein's to make. See, there's nonegotiations; there's nothing to talk about. We don't want you to have weapons of mass destruction. You agreed to that; you said you would agree to that. Now you've got to show the world you don't have them. It's up to you, Mr. Hussein. 
Nobody likes war in America. We're a peaceful nation. Nobody wants there to be war. On the other hand, a lot of folks— Republicans and Democrats, people who could care less about political parties—now are beginning to understand the true threat. In order to keep the peace, Mr. Hussein and the world community must work to disarm him. And if they won't, I will lead a coalition of nations, like-minded nations to send the world that we long for peace—send a message: We long for peace in this world, and we will not let the world's worst leaders threaten, blackmail, hurt America, our friends and allies, with the world's worst weapons. 
We owe this to our children. We owe it to peace. We owe it for a peaceful world to deal with the threats we see. We cannot ignore history. We must not ignore reality. We must do everything we can to disarm this man before he hurts one single American. 

The President's Radio Address
October 5, 2002
The danger to America from the Iraqi regime is grave and growing. The regime is guilty of beginning two wars. It has a horrible history of striking without warning. In defiance of pledges to the United Nations, Iraq has stockpiled biological and chemical weapons and is rebuilding the facilities used to make more of those weapons. Saddam Hussein has used these weapons of death against innocent Iraqi people, and we have every reason to believe he will use them again. 
Iraq has longstanding ties to terrorist groups, which are capable of and willing to deliver weapons of mass death. And Iraq is ruled by perhaps the world's most brutal dictator, who has already committed genocide with chemical weapons, ordered the torture of children, and instituted the systematic rape of the wives and daughters of his political opponents. 
We cannot leave the future of peace and the security of America in the hands of this cruel and dangerous man. This dictator must be disarmed, and all the United Nations resolutions against his brutality and support for terrorism must be enforced. 
The United States does not desire military conflict, because we know the awful nature of war. Our country values life, and we will never seek war unless it is essential to security and justice. We hope that Iraq complies with the world's demands. If, however, the Iraqi regime persists in its defiance, the use of force may become unavoidable. Delay, indecision, and inaction are not options for America, because they could lead to massive and sudden horror. 
Should force be required to bring Saddam to account, the United States will work with other nations to help the Iraqi people rebuild and form a just government. 
We have no quarrel with the Iraqi people. They are the daily victims of Saddam Hussein's oppression, and they will be the first to benefit when the world's demands are met. 
American security, the safety of our friends, and the values of our country lead us to confront this gathering threat. By supporting the resolution now before them, Members of Congress will send a clear message to Saddam: His only choice is to fully comply with the demands of the world. And the time for that choice is limited. Supporting this resolution will also show the resolve of the United States and will help spur the United Nations to act. 

Address to the Nation on Iraq From Cincinnati, Ohio
October 7, 2002
Tonight I want to take a few minutes to discuss a grave threat to peace and America's determination to lead the world in confronting that threat. 
The threat comes from Iraq. It arises directly from the Iraqi regime's own actions—its history of aggression and its drive toward an arsenal of terror. Eleven years ago, as a condition for ending the Persian Gulf war, the Iraqi regime was required to destroy its weapons of mass destruction, to cease all development of such weapons, and to stop all support for terrorist groups. The Iraqi regime has violated all of those obligations. It possesses and produces chemical and biological weapons. It is seeking nuclear weapons. It has given shelter and support to terrorism and practices terror against its own people. The entire world has witnessed Iraq's 11-year history of defiance, deception, and bad faith. 
We must also never forget the most vivid events of recent history. On September the 11th, 2001, America felt its vulnerability, even to threats that gather on the other side of the Earth. We resolved then and we are resolved today to confront every threat, from any source, that could bring sudden terror and suffering to America. 
Members of Congress of both political parties and members of the United Nations Security Council agree that Saddam Hussein is a threat to peace and must disarm. We agree that the Iraqi dictator must notbepermitted to threaten America and the world with horrible poisons and diseases and gases and atomic weapons. Since we all agree on this goal, the issue is: How can we best achieve it? 
Many Americans have raised legitimate questions about the nature of the threat, about the urgency of action—why be concerned now—about the link between Iraq developing weapons of terror and the wider war on terror. These are all issues we've discussed broadly and fully within my administration. And tonight I want to share those discussions with you. 
First, some ask why Iraq is different from other countries or regimes that also have terrible weapons. While there are many dangers in the world, the threat from Iraq stands alone because it gathers the most serious dangers of our age in one place. Iraq's weapons of mass destruction are controlled by a murderous tyrant who has already used chemical weapons to kill thousands of people. This same tyrant has tried to dominate the Middle East, has invaded and brutally occupied a small neighbor, has struck other nations without warning, and holds an unrelenting hostility toward the United States. 
By its past and present actions, by its technological capabilities, by the merciless nature of its regime, Iraq is unique. As a former chief weapons inspector of the U.N. has said, "The fundamental problem with Iraq remains the nature of the regime, itself. Saddam Hussein is a homicidal dictator who is addicted to weapons of mass destruction." 
Some ask how urgent this danger is to America and the world. The danger is already significant, and it only grows worse with time. If we know Saddam Hussein has dangerous weapons today—and we do—does it make any sense for the world to wait to confront him as he grows even stronger and develops even more dangerous weapons? 
In 1995, after several years of deceit by the Iraqi regime, the head of Iraq's military industries defected. It was then that the regime was forced to admit that it had produced more than 30,000 liters of anthrax and other deadly biological agents. The inspectors, however, concluded that Iraq had likely produced 2 to 4 times that amount. This is a massive stockpile of biological weapons that has never been accounted for and is capable of killing millions. 
We know that the regime has produced thousands of tons of chemical agents, including mustard gas, sarin nerve gas, VX nerve gas. Saddam Hussein also has experience in using chemical weapons. He has ordered chemical attacks on Iran and on more than 40 villages in his own country. These actions killed or injured at least 20,000 people, more than 6 times the number of people who died in the attacks of September the 11th. 
And surveillance photos reveal that the regime is rebuilding facilities that it had used to produce chemical and biological weapons. Every chemical and biological weapon that Iraq has or makes is a direct violation of the truce that ended the Persian Gulf war in 1991. Yet, Saddam Hussein has chosen to build and keep these weapons despite international sanctions, U.N. demands, and isolation from the civilized world. 
Iraq possesses ballistic missiles with a likely range of hundreds of miles—far enough to strike Saudi Arabia, Israel, Turkey, and other nations—in a region where more than 135,000 American civilians and service members live and work. We've also discovered through intelligence that Iraq has a growing fleet of manned and unmanned aerial vehicles that could be used to disperse chemical or biological weapons across broad areas. We're concerned that Iraq is exploring ways of using these UAVs for missions targeting the United States. And of course, sophisticated delivery systems aren't required for a chemical or biological attack; all that might be required are a small container and one terrorist or Iraqi intelligence operative to deliver it. 
And that is the source of our urgent concern about Saddam Hussein's links to international terrorist groups. Over the years, Iraq has provided safe haven to terrorists such as Abu Nidal, whose terror organization carried out more than 90 terrorist attacks in 20 countries that killed or injured nearly 900 people, including 12 Americans. Iraq has also provided safe haven to Abu Abbas, who was responsible for seizing the Achille Lauro and killing an American passenger. And we know that Iraq is continuing to finance terror and gives assistance to groups that use terrorism to undermine Middle East peace. 
We know that Iraq and the Al Qaida terrorist network share a common enemy— the United States of America. We know that Iraq and Al Qaida have had high-level contacts that go back a decade. Some Al Qaida leaders who fled Afghanistan went to Iraq. These include one very senior Al Qaida leader who received medical treatment in Baghdad this year, and who has been associated with planning for chemical and biological attacks. We've learned that Iraq has trained Al Qaida members in bombmaking and poisons and deadly gases. And we know that after September the 11th, Saddam Hussein's regime gleefully celebrated the terrorist attacks on America. 
Iraq could decide on any given day to provide a biological or chemical weapon to a terrorist group or individual terrorists. Alliance with terrorists could allow the Iraqi regime to attack America without leaving any fingerprints. 
Some have argued that confronting the threat from Iraq could detract from the war against terror. To the contrary, confronting the threat posed by Iraq is crucial to winning the war on terror. When I spoke to Congress more than a year ago, I said that those who harbor terrorists are as guilty as the terrorists themselves. Saddam Hussein is harboring terrorists and the instruments of terror, the instruments of mass death and destruction. And he cannot be trusted. The risk is simply too great that he will use them or provide them to a terror network. 
Terror cells and outlaw regimes building weapons of mass destruction are different faces of the same evil. Our security requires that we confront both, and the United States military is capable of confronting both. 
Many people have asked how close Saddam Hussein is to developing a nuclear weapon. Well, we don't know exactly, and that's the problem. Before the Gulf war, the best intelligence indicated that Iraq was 8 to 10 years away from developing a nuclear weapon. After the war, international inspectors learned that the regime had been much closer—the regime in Iraq would likely have possessed a nuclear weapon no later than 1993. The inspectors discovered that Iraq had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a workable nuclear weapon, and was pursuing several different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb. 
Before being barred from Iraq in 1998, the International Atomic Energy Agency dismantled extensive nuclear weapons-related facilities, including three uranium enrichment sites. That same year, information from a high-ranking Iraqi nuclear engineer who had defected revealed that despite his public promises, Saddam Hussein had ordered his nuclear program to continue. 
The evidence indicates that Iraq is reconstituting its nuclear weapons program. Saddam Hussein has held numerous meetings with Iraqi nuclear scientists, a group he calls his "nuclear mujahideen," his nuclear holy warriors. Satellite photographs reveal that Iraq is rebuilding facilities at sites that have been part of its nuclear program in the past. Iraq has attempted to purchase high-strength aluminum tubes and other equipment needed for gas centrifuges, which are used to enrich uranium for nuclear weapons. 
If the Iraqi regime is able to produce, buy, or steal an amount of highly enriched uranium a little larger than a single softball, it could have a nuclear weapon in less than a year. And if we allow that to happen, a terrible line would be crossed. Saddam Hussein would be in a position to blackmail anyone who opposes his aggression. He would be in a position to dominate the Middle East. He would be in a position to threaten America. And Saddam Hussein would be in a position to pass nuclear technology to terrorists. 
Some citizens wonder, after 11 years of living with this problem, why do we need to confront it now? And there's a reason. We've experienced the horror of September the 11th. We have seen that those who hate America are willing to crash airplanes into buildings full of innocent people. Our enemies would be no less willing—in fact, they would be eager—to use biological or chemical or a nuclear weapon. 
Knowing these realities, America must not ignore the threat gathering against us. Facing clear evidence of peril, we cannot wait for the final proof, the smoking gun, that could come in the form of a mushroom cloud. As President Kennedy said in October of 1962, "Neither the United States of America nor the world community of nations can tolerate deliberate deception and offensive threats on the part of any nation, large or small. We no longer live in a world," he said, "where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute maximum peril." 
Understanding the threats of our time, knowing the designs and deceptions of the Iraqi regime, we have every reason to assume the worst, and we have an urgent duty to prevent the worst from occurring. 
Some believe we can address this danger by simply resuming the old approach to inspections and applying diplomatic and economic pressure. Yet this is precisely what the world has tried to do since 1991. The U.N. inspections program was met with systematic deception. The Iraqi regime bugged hotel rooms and offices of inspectors to find where they were going next. They forged documents, destroyed evidence, and developed mobile weapons facilities to keep a step ahead of inspectors. Eight so-called Presidential palaces were declared off-limits to unfettered inspections. These sites actually encompass 12 square miles, with hundreds of structures, both above and below the ground, where sensitive materials could be hidden. 
The world has also tried economic sanctions and watched Iraq use billions of dollars in illegal oil revenues to fund more weapons purchases, rather than providing for the needs of the Iraqi people. 
The world has tried limited military strikes to destroy Iraq's weapons of mass destruction capabilities, only to see them openly rebuilt, while the regime again denies they even exist. 
The world has tried no-fly zones to keep Saddam from terrorizing his own people, and in the last year alone, the Iraqi military has fired upon American and British pilots more than 750 times. 
After 11 years during which we have tried containment, sanctions, inspections, even selected military action, the end result is that Saddam Hussein still has chemical and biological weapons and is increasing his capabilities to make more. And he is moving ever closer to developing a nuclear weapon. 
Clearly, to actually work, any new inspections, sanctions, or enforcement mechanisms will have to be very different. America wants the U.N. to be an effective organization that helps keep the peace. And that is why we are urging the Security Council to adopt a new resolution setting out tough, immediate requirements. Among those requirements, the Iraqi regime must reveal and destroy, under U.N. supervision, all existing weapons of mass destruction. To ensure that we learn the truth, the regime must allow witnesses to its illegal activities to be interviewed outside the country, and these witnesses must be free to bring their families with them so they are all beyond the reach of Saddam Hussein's terror and murder. And inspectors must have access to any site, at any time, without preclearance, without delay, without exceptions. 
The time for denying, deceiving, and delaying has come to an end. Saddam Hussein must disarm himself, or for the sake of peace, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
Many nations are joining us in insisting that Saddam Hussein's regime be held accountable. They arecommitted to defending the international security that protects the lives of both our citizens and theirs. And that's why America is challenging all nations to take the resolutions of the U.N. Security Council seriously. 
And these resolutions are very clear. In addition to declaring and destroying all of its weapons of mass destruction, Iraq must end its support for terrorism. It must cease the persecution of its civilian population. It must stop all illicit trade outside the oilfor-food program. It must release or account for all Gulf war personnel, including an American pilot whose fate is still unknown. 
By taking these steps and by only taking these steps, the Iraqi regime has an opportunity to avoid conflict. Taking these steps would also change the nature of the Iraqi regime, itself. America hopes the regime will make that choice. Unfortunately, at least so far, we have little reason to expect it. And that's why two administrations, mine and President Clinton's, have stated that regime change in Iraq is the only certain means of removing a great danger to our Nation. 
I hope this will not require military action, but it may. And military conflict could be difficult. An Iraqi regime faced with its own demise may attempt cruel and desperate measures. If Saddam Hussein orders such measures, his generals would be well advised to refuse those orders. If they do not refuse, they must understand that all war criminals will be pursued and punished. If we have to act, we will take every precaution that is possible. We will plan carefully. We will act with the full power of the United States military. We will act with allies at our side, and we will prevail. 
There is no easy or risk-free course of action. Some have argued we should wait, and that's an option. In my view, it's the riskiest of all options, because the longer we wait, the stronger and bolder Saddam Hussein will become. We could wait and hope that Saddam does not give weapons to terrorists or develop a nuclear weapon to blackmail the world. But I'm convinced that is a hope against all evidence. As Americans, we want peace; we work and sacrifice for peace. But there can be no peace if our security depends on the will and whims of a ruthless and aggressive dictator. I'm not willing to stake one American life on trusting Saddam Hussein. 
Failure to act would embolden other tyrants, allow terrorists access to new weapons and new resources, and make blackmail a permanent feature of world events. The United Nations would betray the purpose of its founding and prove irrelevant to the problems of our time. And through its inaction, the United States would resign itself to a future of fear. 
That is not the America I know. That is not the America I serve. We refuse to live in fear. This Nation, in World War and in cold war, has neverpermitted the brutal and lawless to set history's course. Now as before, we will secure our Nation, protect our freedom, and help others to find freedom of their own. 
Some worry that a change of leadership in Iraq could create instability and make the situation worse. The situation could hardly get worse for world security and for the people of Iraq. The lives of Iraqi citizens would improve dramatically if Saddam Hussein were no longer in power, just as the lives of Afghanistan's citizens improved after the Taliban. The dictator of Iraq is a student of Stalin, using murder as a tool of terror and control, within his own cabinet, within his own army, and even within his own family. On Saddam Hussein's orders, opponents have been decapitated, wives and mothers of political opponents have been systematically raped as a method of intimidation, and political prisoners have been forced to watch their own children being tortured. 
America believes that all people are entitled to hope and human rights, to the nonnegotiable demands of human dignity. People everywhere prefer freedom to slavery, prosperity to squalor, self-government to the rule of terror and torture. America is a friend to the people of Iraq. Our demands are directed only at the regime that enslaves them and threatens us. When these demands are met, the first and greatest benefit will come to Iraqi men, women, and children. The oppression of Kurds, Assyrians, Turkomans, Shi'a, Sunnis, and others will be lifted. The long captivity of Iraq will end, and an era of new hope will begin. 
Iraq is a land rich in culture and resources and talent. Freed from the weight of oppression, Iraq's people will be able to share in the progress and prosperity of our time. If military actionisnecessary, the United States and our allies will help the Iraqi people rebuild their economy and create the institutions of liberty in a unified Iraq at peace with its neighbors. 
Later this week, the United States Congress will vote on this matter. I have asked Congress to authorize the use of America's military, if it proves necessary, to enforce U.N. Security Council demands. Approving this resolution does not mean that military action is imminent or unavoidable. The resolution will tell the United Nations and all nations that America speaks with one voice and is determined to make the demands of the civilized world mean something. Congress will also be sending a message to the dictator in Iraq that his only chance—his only choice is full compliance, and the time remaining for that choice is limited. Members of Congress are nearing an historic vote. I'm confident they will fully consider the facts and their duties. 
The attacks of September the 11th showed our country that vast oceans no longer protect us from danger. Before that tragic date, we had only hints of Al Qaida's plans and designs. Today in Iraq, we see a threat whose outlines are far more clearly defined and whose consequences could be far more deadly. Saddam Hussein's actions have put us on notice, and there is no refuge from our responsibilities. 
We did not ask for this present challenge, but we accept it. Like other generations of Americans, we will meet the responsibility of defending human liberty against violence and aggression. By ourresolve, we will give strength to others. By our courage, we will give hope to others. And by our actions, we will secure the peace and lead the world to a better day. 

Remarks in Alcoa, Tennessee
October 8, 2002
Last night, I continued a dialog on the war on terror. I talked about a significant threat to our country, and that threat is Saddam Hussein and some of the folks in Iraq. 
Audience member. Chase 'em out! 
The President. I truly believe that, as you could tell from my discussion last night if you listened, that he is a threat. He is a threat to the United States. He's a threat to our friends in the region. He's a threat to anybody who holds freedom dear to his heart. 
People are concerned about Saddam, and I understand that. But a lot of Americans have understood that the dynamics have shifted since 11 years ago, because of what happened on September the 11th. No longer are we secure. No longer can we feel free because we've got two oceans separating us from—from that part of the world, for example. And therefore, it's very important for us as a country to think about how best to protect us for the short run and the long run. We owe this to our children. This debate is an incredibly important debate for our country to have. 
I want to thank members of both political parties for taking a—for realizing the seriousness of this issue. This week, you'll see the Congress debate this issue. As I said last night, this isn't an issue of committing our military one way or the other. It doesn't say this—the resolution—threat is imminent, nor does it say it's unavoidable. But it does send a clear signal to the world, and I mean not only the United Nations but the whole world, that we take this threat very seriously in America, that we'll be speaking with one voice, that we love our freedoms, and that if the United Nations is unable to deal with the problem— and I certainly hope they can—that the United States will lead—and if Saddam Hussein chooses not to deal with it. See, he's the guy who said he would have no weapons of mass destruction. He's the person who told the world plainly, "I won't have chemical weapons or biological weapons," or, "I won't seek a nuclear weapon." He said that. He's the man who said, "I promise you I won't do this." Yet for 11 years, he's defied resolution after resolution after resolution. It's his choice to make. 
And the U.N. can show whether or not it's the United Nations or the League of Nations. They get that choice to make, too. It's their choice. But my message, and the message from the Congress, people of both political parties, will be, for the sake of peace—and I emphasize, for the sake of peace—if they won't deal with this man, the United States of America will lead a coalition to disarm him—for the sake of peace. 
I take my responsibilities as the Commander in Chief very seriously. A military option is my last choice, the last choice. But should we commit our military, we'll be ready; we'll be prepared; we'll have a great plan. And make no mistake about it, we will prevail. 

Remarks at a Reception for Hispanic Heritage Month
October 9, 2002
It used to be in this great country we had two oceans protecting us, and if somebody had a problem across the sea, we might help them or we might not. Today, these oceans—the fact that the oceans no longer protect us mean that the battleground is here. So this great country will be deliberate. We will rally other nations. We will give other people a chance to deal with Iraq, for example. 
The U.N., the United Nations now has a chance, Mr. Ambassador. As a member of the Security Council, I'm confident your nation will join us to—to send a clear message that this man must disarm before he hurts America or anybody else. And he has to make a choice. We're a patient nation. He's got a choice to make. His choice is, he must do what he said he was going to do. He said he wasn't going to have weapons of mass destruction. That's what we expect. We take a man for his word. 
But if he doesn't disarm and if the United Nations won't act, for the sake of our freedom, we will lead other countries that love freedom as much as we do and disarm him. We owe it to our children. We love peace in this country, and when we see threats to peace, we will deal with them in a deliberate, calm, logical, and, if need be, forceful way. 

Remarks on House of Representatives Action on the Resolution Authorizing the Use of Military Force Against Iraq
October 10, 2002
would like to thank the Members of the House of Representatives, just as I thanked Speaker Hastert and Leader Gephardt a few minutes ago, for the very strong bipartisan vote authorizing the use of force in Iraq if it becomes necessary. 
The House of Representatives has spoken clearly to the world and to the United Nations Security Council: The gathering threat of Iraq must be confronted fully and finally. Today's vote also sends a clear message to the Iraqi regime: It must disarm and comply with all existing U.N. resolutions, or it will be forced to comply. There are no other options for the Iraqi regime. There can be nonegotiations. The days of Iraq acting as an outlaw state are coming to an end. 

The President's Radio Address
October 12, 2002
Good morning. This week both the House and Senate passed strong bipartisan measures authorizing the use of force in Iraq if it becomes necessary. Our country and our Congress are now united in purpose. America is speaking with one voice: Iraq must disarm and comply with all existing U.N. resolutions, or it will be forced to comply. 
Confronting Iraq is an urgent matter of national security. America's economic security, especially the creation of good jobs, is also an urgent matter requiring Presidential and congressional action. For that reason, I acted on Tuesday to reopen our Pacific coast ports which had been shut down for more than a week due to a labor dispute. The crisis in the western ports was costing our economy up to a billion dollars a day in lost business and lost jobs, hurting truckers and rail operators who transport goods across America, workers on assembly lines, cashiers in retail stores, and manufacturers and farmers who sell across the world. 
Remarks on the Terrorist Attack in Indonesia and an Exchange With Reporters
October 14, 2002
As I've repeatedly said, our thoughts about Iraq relate to the war on terror and that dealing with—or getting Saddam Hussein to disarm is all part of making the world more peaceful. And it's all part of the war against terror.
The President. John, I think what's important is that, first of all, we are working with all parties to get a resolution done. I talked about it again—I talked to Tony Blair about that subject. What I'm interested in is making sure that Saddam Hussein is disarmed. He said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. It is in our national interest that he not have weapons of mass destruction. And anything we do must make it very clear that Saddam must disarm or there will be consequences. And how that language is worked out is up to the diplomats. 
But I am very firm in my desire to make sure that Saddam is disarmed. Hopefully, we can do this peacefully. The use of the military is my last choice, is my last desire. But doing nothing, allowing the status quo to go on, is unacceptable, particularly since we've got a new war on terror that we've— that was launched on September the 11th, 2001, particularly since oceans no longer protect America from people who hate us. 
And so we'll see how it plays out. But I'm anxious to work with the international community. If I wasn't, I wouldn't have gone to the United Nations. 
The President. Well, we'll just see how it comes. What I'm not—what I want is a firm resolution that says, "You disarm," and an inspection regime that is there not for the sake of inspectors but is there to achieve the objective of disarming Mr. Saddam Hussein. It's his choice to make. And in order to make sure the resolution has got any kind of credence with Mr. Hussein, there has to be a consequence. 
The President. I think they're both equally important, and they're both dangerous. And as I said in my speech in Cincinnati, we willfight, if need be, the war on terror on two fronts. We've got plenty of capacity to do so. And I also mentioned the fact that there is a connection between Al Qaida and Saddam Hussein. The war on terror— Iraq is a part on the war on terror. And he must disarm. 
And so I—I respect the opinion of a lot of people, and I respect his opinion. But if we don't deal with Saddam Hussein and disarm him—hopefully, it will be done peacefully—he becomes more and more dangerous. And someday we don't want to step back and say, "Where was the United States Government? How come we didn't act?" And we've got plenty of capacity to fight the war against Al Qaida, which is going to take a while. We just learned a lesson this weekend: It's going to take a while to succeed. And at the same time, the United Nations hopefully will pass— will show their strong desire to disarm Saddam, and we can get after it, get him disarmed before he hurts America. And I'm absolutely confident we can achieve both objectives, John. 

Remarks at a Dinner for Congressional Candidate Thaddeus McCotter in Dearborn, Michigan
October 14, 2002
My job is not only to protect America today but to anticipate problems as well. And obviously I started a significant and important debate about Iraq. I did because I—because I understand the threat of Iraq. This is a country that said he would have no weapons of mass destruction, and he does. This is a country that has defied the United Nations 11 straight years, 16 different resolutions. He's completely ignored the international body. This is a country who has made it clear, he'd like to have a nuclear weapon. And when our inspectors—or the inspectors went into the country right after the Gulf war, it was estimated that they were months away from having a nuclear weapon. This is a country that hates America, hates the people in the neighborhood. This is a country which has invaded two countries, unprovoked. This is a country, the leadership of which has actually used weapons of mass destruction on its own people, on citizens who disagreed with him. This is a country who gassed its neighbors. This is a dangerous man. 
Prior to September the 11th, 2001, we thought two oceans would protect us. We thought we could kind of step back and say, "This may be somebody else's problem, in another part of the world, and we may or may not deal with it." After September the 11th, we've entered into a new era and a new war. This is a man that we know has had connections with Al Qaida. This is a man who, in my judgment, would like to use Al Qaida as a forward army. And this is a man that we must deal with for the sake of peace, for the sake of our children's peace. 
Military option is my last choice. It's not my—it's the last thing I want to do, is commit our military. My first choice is for Saddam Hussein to do what he said he would do, and after 11 years, disarm. I doubt he's going to do that, but it's his choice to make. See, he gets to make the choice. The United Nations needs to make a choice, whether it will be the League of Nations or the United Nations, whether it will be an empty debating society or a group of countries who have got the capacity and the will and the backbone to help keep the peace—their choice to make. I hope this happens peacefully. I hope he disarms. But for the sake of our future, for the sake of peace itself, if need be, the United States will lead a strong coalition of freedom-loving nations and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Waterford, Michigan
October 14, 2002
And the war on terror is just not Al Qaida. There are other terrorists around. There are other threats to our country with which we must deal. And that means—and one place is Iraq. I want to—let me share with you some thoughts, a serious, serious, subject. It's one that's got a lot of folks debating in the coffee shops or in the homes about Iraq. I want to remind you of a couple of things. 
First of all, 11 years ago this leader of Iraq, the dictator of Iraq, made a pledge that he would not have weapons of mass destruction. He promised the world after he got whipped that he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. And the Security Council of the United Nations passed a resolution which said, "You won't have weapons of mass destruction." Since that time, he has lied; he has deceived; he has not listened to the U.N. Security Council resolutions. Since that time, we now recognize as a country that oceans no longer protect us like they used to. A new reality set in, in America. It used to be we could kind of sit back and look at a threat from afar and say, "Well, that may affect somebody else, but it doesn't affect us." 
Prior to September the 11th, we had the comfort of realizing or looking back in history and saying that we're pretty safe here in America. Others may be threatened— after all, he attacked two in his neighborhood; he gassed his own people—but not us. September the 11th changed the equation, changed our thinking. It also changed our thinking when we began to realize that one of the most dangerous things that can happen in the modern era is for a deceiving dictator who has gassed his own people, who has weapons of mass destruction, to team up with an organization like Al Qaida. 
As I said—I was a little more diplomatic in my speech, but we need to think about Saddam Hussein using Al Qaida to do his dirty work to not leave fingerprints behind. I went to the United Nations. I did so because I wanted to challenge that body. Sixteen resolutions, sixteen defiances: They passed resolution after resolution after resolution, and 16 times Saddam Hussein has defied those resolutions. For the sake of keeping peace, it's important that there be an international body that has backbone, that can work to keep the peace in this new era we're in. And now is the time for choice. The United Nations can decide whether it's the League of Nations or whether or not it is a United Nations capable of keeping the peace. 
There is universal agreement that Saddam Hussein poses a serious threat. He's a threat to the neighborhood. He's a threat to our allies. There is universal understanding that right after the Gulf war he was close to having a nuclear weapon. He still wants to have a nuclear weapon. For the sake of peace, for the sake of our security, now is the time to make sure that Saddam says what he said he would do. He must disarm. It's his choice to make. He said he would disarm. He must disarm. The U.N. said he must disarm. They can disarm him. 
But for the sake of security of our country—their choice to make—I hope it's done peacefully. I hope we never use a military—one military troop in Iraq. But for the sake of the peace and security of the United States, Saddam Hussein must disarm, or the United States, with friends and allies, will disarm him. 

Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel and an Exchange With Reporters
October 16, 2002
The President. Well, first of all, I have told the Prime Minister that my hope is, is that we could achieve a disarmament of the Iraqi regime peacefully. I haven't given up on the fact that we can achieve it peacefully. We have no plans to use our military until—unless we need to. I explained to the Prime Minister, just like I explain to every citizen who is interested in this, the military is my last choice, not my first choice. 
So we talked about the desire to—for the U.N. Security Council to be strong and for the nations that care about peace to see that Saddam is disarmed. And he's got to disarm himself. That's what we talked about. 
The President. You mean an unprovoked attack—if tomorrow an Iraqi missile lands? 
The President. If Iraq were to attack Israel tomorrow, I'm sure there would be an appropriate response. 
The President. If Iraq attacks Israel tomorrow, I would assume the Prime Minister would respond. He's got—he's got a desire to defend himself. 
Our hope is that the Iraqi regime will disarm peacefully. But I can't—maybe— maybe Saddam will attack tomorrow. He's certainly a dangerous man. And he's got to understand that the international community won't tolerate an unprovoked attack on Israel or anybody else, for that matter. Of course, he's done it in the past. That's what I've explained to the American people. He's attacked two nations. He's gassed his own people. He's a dangerous man. That's why he must be disarmed, and that's why the international community must work to disarm him. 
The President. Because I'm a patient man. [Laughter] My mother and wife think that's hysterical when I say that, of course. [Laughter] 
Let's see, because it takes a while to get things done in the U.N., I guess is the answer. I mean, we will—I've made the commitment to go to the U.N.; I've asked the U.N. to act. We have got to deal with members of the Security Council. There are differing opinions on members of the Security Council. And we've got to work hard to reach a consensus, a resolution that will, on the one hand, do everything it can to disarm Saddam Hussein and also has got the capacity for there to be consequences should he not disarm. And therefore, we're working closely with the Perm Five as well as others on the Security Council to reach this resolution. 
I am a patient man. I think it's important. I made the decision to go to the U.N., and therefore, we're willing to work with the U.N. If the U.N. can't act, however, if they're unable to act, if once again after 11 years and 16 resolutions they cannot bring themselves together to disarm Saddam Hussein, then we will lead a coalition to do just that. But in the meantime, we're giving the U.N. time to listen to the arguments and to, hopefully, come together soon to get a resolution which will achieve the objectives. 




Remarks on Signing the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002
October 16, 2002
With this resolution, Congress has now authorized the use of force. I have not ordered the use of force. I hope the use of force will not become necessary. Yet, confronting the threat posed by Iraq is necessary, by whatevermeans that requires. Either the Iraqi regime will give up its weapons of mass destruction, or for the sake of peace, the United States will lead a global coalition to disarm that regime. If any doubt our Nation's resolve, our determination, they would be unwise to test it. 
The Iraqi regime is a serious and growing threat to peace. On the commands of a dictator, the regime is armed with biological and chemical weapons, possesses ballistic missiles, promotes international terror, and seeks nuclear weapons. The same dictator has a history of mass murder, of striking other nations without warning, of intense hatred for America, and of contempt for the demands of the civilized world. 
If Iraq gains even greater destructive power, nations in the Middle East would face blackmail, intimidation, or attack. Chaos in that region would be felt in Europe and beyond. And Iraq's combination of weapons of mass destruction and ties to terrorist groups and ballistic missiles would threaten the peace and security of many nations. Those who choose to live in denial may eventually be forced to live in fear. 
Every nation that shares in the benefits of peace also shares in the duty of defending the peace. The time has arrived once again for the United Nations to live up to the purposes of its founding, to protect our common security. The time has arrived once again for free nations to face up to our global responsibilities and confront a gathering danger. 
In 1991, Iraq was given 15 days to fully disclose all weapons of mass destruction. The dictator has successfully defied that obligation for 4,199 days. The dictator has— and during this 11-year period of his dictatorship, the regime has become highly skilled in the techniques of deception. It has blocked effective inspections of so-called Presidential sites—actually 12 square miles with hundreds of structures where sensitive materials could be hidden. The regime has forged documents, disabled surveillance cameras, and developed mobile weapons facilities to keep ahead of any inspector. 
The Iraqi regime has frustrated the work of international inspectors by firing warning shots, by tapping their telephones, confiscating their documents, blocking aerial inspection flights, and barring access to sites for hours while evidence is carried away. At one location, inspectors actually witnessed Iraqi guards moving files, burning documents, and then dumping the ashes in a river. Aboard U.N. helicopters, Iraqi escorts have physically struggled with inspectors to keep them from approaching certain areas. 
For Iraq, the old weapons inspection process was little more than a game in which cheating was never punished. And that game is over. The ploys and promises of the Iraqi regime no longer matter. The regime is free to continue saying whatever it chooses. Its fate depends entirely on what it actually does. 
Our goal is not merely to limit Iraq's violations of Security Council resolutions or to slow down its weapons program. Our goal is to fully and finally remove a real threat to world peace and to America. Hopefully, this can be done peacefully. Hopefully, we can do this without any military action. Yet, if Iraq is to avoid military action by the international community, it has the obligation to prove compliance with all the world's demands. It's the obligation of Iraq. 
Compliance will begin with a accurate and full and complete accounting for all chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons materials, as well as missiles and other means of delivery anywhere in Iraq. Failure to make such an accounting would be a further indication of the regime's bad faith and aggressive intent. Inspectors must have access to any site in Iraq at any time, without preclearance, without delay, without exceptions. Inspectors must be permitted to operate under new, effective rules. And the Iraqi regime must accept those rules without qualification or negotiation. 
To ensure that we learn the truth, the regime must allow witnesses to its illegal activities to be interviewed outside of the country. These witnesses must be free to bring their entire families with them, so they're beyond the reach of Saddam Hussein's terror, Saddam Hussein's torture, Saddam Hussein's murder. 
In addition to declaring and destroying all of its weapons of mass destruction, Iraq, in accordance with U.N. Security Council demands, must end its support for terrorism. As the U.N. demands, Iraq must cease the persecution of its civilian population. As the U.N. demands, Iraq must stop all illicit trade outside the oil-for-food program. Iraq must also release or account for all Gulf war personnel, including an American pilot whose fate is still unknown. 
The United States takes the resolutions of the Security Council seriously. We urge other nations to do the same. We're working to build the broadest possible coalition to enforce the demands of the world on the Iraqi regime. I've told all the members of the United Nations, America will play its historic role in defeating aggressive tyranny. 
I hope the good people of Iraq will remember our history and not pay attention to the hateful propaganda of their Government. America has never sought to dominate, has never sought to conquer. We've always sought to liberate and to free. Our desire is to help Iraqi citizens find the blessings of liberty within their own culture and their own traditions. The Iraqi people cannot flourish under a dictator that oppresses them and threatens them. Gifted people of Iraq will flourish if and when oppression is lifted. 
When Iraq has a government committed to the freedom and well-being of its people, America, along with many other nations, will share a responsibility to help Iraq reform and prosper. And we will meet our responsibilities. That's our pledge to the Iraqi people. 
Like the Members of Congress here today, I've carefully weighed the human cost of every option before us. If we go into battle, as a last resort, we will confront an enemy capable of irrational miscalculations, capable of terrible deeds. As the Commander in Chief, I know the risks to our country. I'm fully responsible to the young men and women in uniform who may face these risks. Yet those risks only increase with time, and the costs could be immeasurably higher in years to come. To shrink from this threat would bring a false sense of temporary peace, leading to a future in which millions live or die at the discretion of a brutal dictator. That's not true peace, and we will notaccept it. 
Remarks at a Luncheon for Gubernatorial Candidate Sonny Perdue and Senatorial Candidate Saxby Chambliss in Atlanta, Georgia
October 17, 2002
We've got a new task ahead for America, and that is to do everything we can to protect the American people. It used to be that oceans could protect us. We used to be able to sit back here in America and feel safe and confident, because there's two vast oceans to protect us from potential enemies. But that has changed after September the 11th, 2001. And that's why it's essential for our country not only to deal with the threats we see today but to deal with threats we may see in the immediate tomorrow. That's why I called upon the United Nations and our United States Congress to deal with Iraq before it becomes a—before we get hurt. Oceans no longer protect us. The threat is real. The threat's alive. 
I want to thank Saxby and other Members of the United States Congress for joining me in passing a strong resolution so that the United States speaks with one voice. It's now up for Mr. Saddam Hussein to do what he said he would do, to disarm. It's now up for the free nations of the world to show some courage and backbone and disarm him. 

Remarks at Rochester Community and Technical College in Rochester, Minnesota
October 18, 2002
I recently have been talking about an issue that's a grave issue of national concern, and that's Iraq. It's an issue that— we've had a good debate in Congress; it was an important debate. Congress is now speaking with one voice, along with me, and here's what we're saying: Any man who murders his own people, any man who uses weapons of mass destruction on his own people, any man who invades two countries in his region, any man who has defied resolution after resolution after resolution, any man who said he would disarm and hasn't, is a man who is a threat. And therefore, we callupon Mr. Saddam Hussein to disarm, just like he said he would do. 
And we callupon the United Nations to show us whether or not this is a body that can effectively keep the peace, or it's like one its predecessors, the League of Nations. We callupon people to come together to disarm this man before he harms the United States or our friends and allies. In the name of peace—in the name of peace, we callupon Saddam to disarm. 

Remarks Following Discussions With Secretary General Lord Robertson of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and an Exchange With Reporters
October 21, 2002
President Bush. Absolutely. Saddam Hussein is unique, in this sense: He has thumbed his nose at the world for 11 years. The United Nations has passed 16 resolutions to deal with this man, and the resolutions are all aimed at disarmament, amongst other things. And for 11 years, he said, "No, I refuse to disarm." 
Now, what makes him even more unique is the fact he's actually gassed his own people. He has used weapons of mass destruction on neighboring countries, and he's used weapons of mass destruction on his own citizenry. He wants to have a nuclear weapon. He has made it very clear: He hates the United States, and as importantly, he hates friends of ours. 
We've tried diplomacy. We're trying it one more time. I believe the free world, if we make up our mind to, can disarm this man peacefully. 
But if not, there's—we have the will and the desire, as do other nations, to disarm Saddam. It's up to him to make that decision, and it's up to the United Nations. And we'll determine here soon whether the United Nations has got the will, and then it's up to Saddam to make the decision. 
President Bush. The stated policy of the United States is regime change, because for 11 years MDNMSaddam Hussein has ignored the United Nations and the free world. For 11 years he has—he said, "Look, you passed all these resolutions. I could care less what you passed." And that's why the stated policy of our Government, the previous administration and this administration, is regime change—because we don't believe he is going to change. 
However, if he were to meet all the conditions of the United Nations, the conditions that I've described very clearly in terms that everybody can understand, that in itself will signal the regime has changed.

Remarks in Downingtown, Pennsylvania
October 22, 2002
That's why I've started and stimulated a discussion on Iraq. I wanted the American people to know that there's a new reality which we face, a reality that oceans no longer protect us, the reality that this person in Iraq has killed his own people with weapons of mass destruction, a reality that he has invaded countries, the reality that he has stiffed the United Nations for 11 years. Sixteen different resolutions have been passed calling on this man to disarm. Sixteen times he's ignored world mandates. These are the realities we face, and we must deal with it. 
I appreciate the Members of the Senate; I appreciate the Members of the House of Representatives for voting overwhelmingly to send with one voice this message— that Saddam Hussein must disarm, that the world for the sake of peace, for the sake of peace here at home, for the sake of peace in the Middle East, for the sake of world peace—Saddam Hussein must do what he promised. 
It's an important time in our history to determine whether or not we're going to be a nation which is willing to work with others to keep the peace. The answer is, you bet. But if they won't—the United Nations can't make its mind up—if Saddam Hussein won't disarm, we will lead a coalition to disarm him for the sake of peace. 

Remarks in Bangor, Maine
October 22, 2002
We learned a tough lesson on September the 11th. See, it used to be oceans could protect us, and if there was a war on another continent, we'd make the choice as to whether or not we would join that war, that we were safe and secure as a nation because oceans could keep us safe and secure. But the harsh reality of the 21st century came home. Oceans no longer protect us. Threats overseas are threats that we must recognize here at home and deal with them. That's why I asked the United States Congress to have a dialog on Iraq. That's why I asked the Congress to seriously consider, along with the administration, as to whether or not we should deal with a true threat to our country. 
I want to remind you that we're dealing with a man who has used weapons of mass destruction on his own people, on people in his neighborhood. This is a man who has defied the United Nations 16 times over an 11-year period. The world has said, "You must do what you said you would do, Saddam Hussein, and that is disarm." And 16 times the United Nations, over and over and over again, has written resolution after resolution, saying, "Mr. Saddam Hussein, you must disarm." And he has defied an international body. 
So I gave a speech, and I said to the world, "For the sake of peace, for the sake of peace at home, for the sake of peace in the Middle East, for the sake of determining whether or not that international body is going to be the League of Nations or the United Nations, Saddam Hussein must disarm, and we expect you, the world, to disarm him"—for the sake of peace, for the sake of security for our country. It's his choice to make. "You said you would disarm, disarm. The United Nations has asked you to disarm." They need to work together to disarm. But my fellow Americans, if they won't act, and if Saddam Hussein won't act, for the sake of peace, for the sake of our security, we will lead a coalition to disarm that man. 

Remarks on Signing the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2003 and the Military Construction Appropriation Act, 2003
October 23, 2002
Since September the 11th, Americans have been reminded that the safety of many depends on the courage and skill of a few. We've asked our military to bring justice to agents of terror. We've asked our military to liberate a captive people on the other side of the Earth. We've asked our military to prepare for conflict in Iraq, if it proves necessary. We're asking young Americans to serve in many places far from home and at great risk. We owe them every resource, every weapon, and every tool they need to fulfill their missions.

Remarks in Charlotte, North Carolina
October 24, 2002
That's why I started talking about the issue of Iraq. In the new reality, we must view all threats—we must take all threats seriously. We must have a cold, hard look at every threat facing America. And the man over there in Iraq is a threat. After all, he has gassed his own people. He hates what we stand for. He hates what America believes in. He has not only gassed his own people; he used weapons of mass destruction on his own people. He's used weapons of mass destruction on countries in his neighborhood. He has told the world he won't have weapons of mass destruction; for 11 years he's lied. Time and time and time again, he has lied. Time and time and time again, the United Nations has passed resolutions telling him, "Disarm." He's totally ignored the resolutions. 
So here is our strategy. Our strategy is to make it clear to the United Nations: We want you to be effective. We don't want you to be the League of Nations. We want you to be an effective United Nations. It's your choice to make. We're sending a clear message to Mr. Saddam Hussein: We believe in peace in America. We want the world to be peaceful, not only for ourselves but for people in your neighborhood. And so you must disarm. You said you would disarm, and you must disarm. It's your choice to make. 
We have made the call to the international community and to Mr. Saddam Hussein, himself, to disarm. But my friends, if the United Nations won't act, if they're feeble in their responsibility, and if Saddam Hussein won't disarm, the United States will lead a coalition in the name of peace to disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Columbia, South Carolina
October 24, 2002
And that's why I've asked our country to think seriously about Saddam Hussein in Iraq. Saddam Hussein is a man who said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. He made that promise to the world. He's hiding; he's deceiving; he's lying about whether he has them or not. Not only does he have them, he used them. He used them against people in his neighborhood. He used them against his own people. This is a man who has lied about whether or not he possesses weapons of mass destruction, a man who uses them, a man who hates America, a man who hates our friends. He's a threat to peace. 
The United Nations decided they were going to deal with Saddam a while ago. Sixteen resolutions have been passed in the United Nations, resolution after resolution after resolution, calling him to account. And he's ignored them. So I made a decision on behalf of our country that I would go to that body and, for the sake of peace, remind them they have an obligation to honor those resolutions, to do something about them. I made the case that you have a choice, United Nations, to keep the peace by showing some backbone. You can be the United Nations or the League of Nations. It's your choice. 
And my message to Saddam Hussein is clear as well: You've said you would disarm. For the sake of peace, you said you would get rid of the weapons of mass destruction. It's your choice to make. And so we're working with the international community, reminding Saddam Hussein of his obligations. But I want you all to know, for the sake of peace, for the sake of the security of the United States and our friends and allies, if the United Nations won't deal with him, if he refuses to hear the callfor peace, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm Saddam Hussein. 

The President's News Conference With President Jiang Zemin of China in Crawford, Texas
October 25, 2002
This is the third meeting of the President and me, and our personal relations and the relations between our two countries are strong. In our meeting, we discussed the threat posed by the Iraqi regime. China supports Iraq's strict compliance with U.N. Security Council resolutions. And today we discussed and I urged President Jiang to support a new Security Council resolution demanding Iraq fully disarm itself of weapons of mass destruction.
I made it clear to the President of China that I am interested in seeing to it that the United Nations is effective—effective in disarming Saddam Hussein. That's what the United Nations has said for 11 years, that Saddam ought to disarm. And therefore, any resolution that evolves must be one which does the job of holding Saddam Hussein to account. That includes a rigorous, new, and vibrant inspections regime, the purpose of which is disarmament, not inspections for the sake of inspections. 
And any resolution which will be effective must have—there must be consequences. Let me put it bluntly: There must be consequences in order to be effective. And therefore, in order for there to be consequences, we will notaccept a resolution which prevents us from doing exactly what I have told the American people is going to happen. That is, if the U.N. won't act and if Saddam won't disarm, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. And we're working with all countries, particularly those on the Perm 5, to do just that. 
And that's what we'll accept, something that will enable us to do precisely what I have just described and what I describe almost every day that I'm out there talking to the American people. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Vicente Fox of Mexico and an Exchange With Reporters in Los Cabos, Mexico
October 26, 2002
And we did talk about world peace and Iraq. Mexico is a member of the Security Council. We discussed how to keep the world peaceful, how to hold people to account, how to make sure the United Nations is effective. And I appreciate so very much the President and the Foreign Minister's desire to consult closely with the United States as we move forward to making the world more peaceful.

President Bush. The only consequence, of course, is with Saddam Hussein. And if the U.N. does not pass a resolution which holds him to account and that has consequences, then as I have said in speech after speech after speech, if the U.N. won't act, if Saddam Hussein won't disarm, we will lead a coalition to disarm him.

Remarks in Denver, Colorado
October 28, 2002
And there's a true threat which exists in Iraq. Oh, we can hope the man changes, but I want you to remember that this is a person who has gassed his own people. It's a person who claims he has no weapons of mass destruction, in order to escape the dictums of the U.N. Security Council and the United Nations, but he's got them. See, he'll lie. He'll deceive us. And he'll use them. 
He can't stand America. He can't stand our friends and allies. For 11 years he's defied 16 resolutions out of the United Nations. You see, 11 years ago, he said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. He told the world, "Fine, I got whipped, and I'm not going to have weapons of mass destruction." And then he defied the U.N., resolution after resolution after resolution. He's a threat to America, and he's a threat to our friends. He's even more of a threat now that we've learned that he's anxious to have—once again to develop a nuclear weapon. He's got connections with Al Qaida. 
And Saddam Hussein has got a choice to make too. He can do what he said he would do; he can disarm. The Congress debated the issue, members from both parties stated their opinion. It was a good, healthy, open debate. And the Congress has now joined with the administration to speak with one voice, and here's our message. Our message from America is this: If the United Nations does not have the will or the courage to disarm Saddam Hussein, and if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Alamogordo, New Mexico
October 28, 2002
We've got to be clear-eyed about the new dangers we face. We've got to be realistic. If we're going to protect America, it's very important for all of us, particularly those of us in Washington, to not hope for the best but to see clearly the threats. And there is a real threat, in my judgment, a real and dangerous threat to America in Iraq, in the form of Saddam Hussein. I want to—this is a man who told the world that he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. He's got weapons of mass destruction. This is a man who has used weapons of mass destruction. He's used them against his neighbors. He's used them against his own people. This is a person who can't stand America. This is a person who has had contacts with Al Qaida. This is a person who has defied international bodies time and time again. This is a person who has made the United Nations look foolish. 
I've also sent a message to Mr. Saddam Hussein: After 11 years, you have defied the U.N. You have not done what you said you would do. And now it is the time for you to disarm. 
The United States Congress, both Republicans and Democrats, have debated this issue, and they spoke with one clear voice. And here is what the administration and now your elected Representatives are saying to the world: Either the United Nations will do its duty to disarm Saddam Hussein, or Saddam Hussein will disarm himself. In either case, if they refuse to act, in the name of peace, in the name of a secure tomorrow, in the name of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in South Bend, Indiana
October 31, 2002
That's changed. And America must understand that has changed. And therefore, threats that in the past may not have seemed overly significant all of a sudden become significant, like the threat to America in Iraq. Saddam Hussein is a threat to our country. He can't stand what we believe in. He doesn't like America. He doesn't like our friends. He's a man who told the world he would have no weapons of mass destruction, and yet, he does. And not only that, he's used weapons of mass destruction. He's used them against his neighbors, and he's used them against his own people. 
For 11 years, he's deceived and denied the world, and he's a threat. He's a threat. If he were to team up, like we think he's trying to do, with one of these terrorist networks, he would be able to use a weapon of mass destruction on America and leave no fingerprints behind. We've got to be clear-eyed about our responsibilities and the threats we face. 
So I went to the United Nations. See, I hope that body can be effective to deal with the new threats that we face, that freedom-loving people face. I told them that "For 16 resolutions this guy has ignored you, and we want you to be successful. We want you to be able to keep the peace, so do something about it." We also sent the message to Saddam Hussein—I'm saying it again right now—"You said you wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. Disarm. Do what you said you would do." 
But if the United Nations won't act, won't fulfill their responsibilities to keep the peace, and if Saddam Hussein will not disarm—their choices, by the way—the United States of America, in the name of peace and in the name of freedom, will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Aberdeen, South Dakota
October 31, 2002
There is a threat in Iraq. And the threat exists because a leader there not only has denied and deceived the world about whether or not he's got weapons of mass destruction, but this is a guy who's used weapons of mass destruction. He not only has them; he's used them. And he's not only used them in his neighborhood; he's used them against his own people. This is a man who cannot stand what we stand for. He hates the fact, like Al Qaida does, that we love freedom. See, they can't stand that. This is a guy who has had connections with these shadowy terrorist networks. As I said in Cincinnati, Ohio, a while back, he's the kind of fellow who would love nothing more than to hurt America and not leave any fingerprints by using a surrogate army on his behalf. He's a problem. He's a true threat to America and our friends and allies. 
I went to the United Nations a while ago because I want the United Nations to be effective. It's a different kind of war we face; we face different kind of threats. It makes sense for there to be an international body that has got the backbone and the capacity to help keep the peace. And so here is my message, a message, by the way, resoundingly supported by members of both political parties in the Senate and the House: The message to the world is that we want the U.N. to succeed. We want those resolutions you pass to be listened to. You have told Saddam Hussein he must disarm. Do your job. 
And Saddam Hussein, you have said you'll disarm; you need to do your job. But if the U.N. won't act, and if Saddam Hussein won't disarm, for the sake of peace, for the sake of a free future for our children, we will lead a coalition of nations and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Charleston, West Virginia
October 31, 2002
And there's a true threat to America and our friends and allies in Iraq. Saddam Hussein—Saddam Hussein is a man who told the world that he would have no weapons of mass destruction. He deceived the world. For 11 long years, he has deceived and denied the truth. This is a man who not only has weapons of mass destruction, a man who was close to having a nuclear weapon at one time, a man who has used weapons of mass destruction on his own people and in his neighborhood. This is a man who hates America and hates our friends. This is a man who has defied the United Nations 16 times. Sixteen times the United Nations has said, "Disarm like you said you were going to," and 16 times he thumbs his nose. 
Saddam Hussein has a choice to make. We've made it clear that nobody likes war; nobody likes what could happen during war. But for the sake of peace, Mr. Hussein, get rid of your weapons. You said you wouldn't have them. Get rid of them. 
The other day the United States Congress stood strong and spoke with one voice. And here's our message: If the United Nations is incapable of disarming Saddam Hussein and if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, then the United States, for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition of nations and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania
November 1, 2002
want the youngsters here to understand that change is a profound change, and U.S. policy needs to change with it if we're realistic and clear-eyed. And that's why I've raised the issue on Iraq. That's why I asked the United States Congress to think about this issue. That's why I've asked the American people to think about this issue. That's why I went to the U.N. to talk about this issue: Because in my judgment and the judgment of a lot of people, Saddam Hussein is a serious threat to America; he's a threat to our friends; he's a threat to our allies. 
This is a man who has told the world for 11 years he would not have weapons of mass destruction. This is a man who is close to having a nuclear weapon. This is a man who has deceived the world. This is a man who not only has weapons of mass destruction; he has used weapons of mass destruction. He has used them on his neighbors, and incredibly enough, he has used weapons of mass destruction on his own citizens. This is a dangerous man who cannot stand America because of what we love. 
And so my message and the message of our United States Congress, including George Gekas, that spoke with one voice to the world is this: The United States will fulfill its obligations to peace; Saddam Hussein will disarm; if not, for the sake of peace, for the sake of securing the homeland, for the sake of protecting our friends and allies, the United States will lead a mighty coalition of freedom-loving nations and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Louisville, Kentucky
November 1, 2002
We learned a tough lesson on September the 11th, which means that, as we see threats, we must be prepared to deal with them. And I see a significant threat to the security of the United States in Iraq. 
Saddam Hussein is a man who told the world he would not have weapons of mass destruction, but he does. He not only has them; he's used them. He has used them against his neighbors, and incredibly enough, he's used them against his own people. This is a man who was close to having a nuclear weapon a decade ago. No telling how close he is now. 
I viewed him as a threat, not only to the American people, because he could become an arsenal to one of these shadow terrorist networks. He could use them as surrogates and not leave any fingerprints behind. 
No, he's a threat. He's not only a threat to us. He's a threat to our close friends in the Middle East. Saddam Hussein is a man who has defied the United Nations not once, not twice, not 3 times, but 16 times they passed resolutions. So I went to that august body, and I said, "The time has come for you to show the world whether or not you've got the capacity to keep the peace, to defend freedom. The time has come for you to show whether or not your resolutions mean anything." 
And I sent the same message to Saddam Hussein. "You said you would disarm. Disarm. For the sake of peace, disarm." 
I took the debate to the United States Congress and, thanks to the Members on this stage and many others, the United States now speaks with one voice. And here it is: Either the United Nations will do its job, either the United Nations will show it is not the League of Nations, but a body with the capacity to keep the peace, and Saddam Hussein will disarm, or for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, the United States will lead a mighty coalition to disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Portsmouth, New Hampshire
November 1, 2002
We have a new day here in America. It's a sobering reality. It's one that—you better make sure your elected officials are clear-eyed about the threats that we face. And we face a threat in the form of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. Saddam Hussein is a man who has told the world he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction, and yet he deceived the world. He's got them. 
Not only does he have them—remember, this is a guy who was a short while away from having a nuclear weapon. Then they dismantled it. Then he started deceiving the world again, and no telling how close he is to having one now. We know he's got chemical weapons, probably has biological weapons. 
But more significantly, we know he uses them. He uses them not only on his neighbors; he uses them on his own people. That's the nature of this man. We know he's got ties with Al Qaida. A nightmare scenario, of course, is that he becomes the arsenal for a terrorist network, where they could attack America, and he'd leave no fingerprints behind. He is a problem. 
I went to the United Nations a while ago because I wanted to remind them that they have a duty, it seems like to me, to bring the free nations together and call the man to account. After all, they passed resolution after resolution after resolution, 16 times that he's defied. 
So I went there and said, "Show us whether or not you can achieve what you're supposed to do. Show us whether or not you've got the backbone necessary to hold the man to account in the name of peace. Show us whether or not you're going to be the United Nations or the League of Nations." 
And my message to Saddam Hussein is just as clear: You said you would not have weapons of mass destruction. In the name of peace, get rid of your weapons of mass destruction. But my message to America, and it's supported by Republicans and Democrats alike: If the United Nations will not act, if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, in the name of peace and in the name of freedom, the United States of America will lead a coalition to disarm him.

Remarks in Tampa, Florida
November 2, 2002
It used to be, we could pick or choose. We learned a lesson that the battlefield is here at home, and we've got to be realistic about that. And that's why I started the debate on Iraq. You see, I view the man as a serious threat to America and our friends and allies. He's a man who has told the world he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction, yet he does. We know a while ago that he was close to having a nuclear weapon. We have no idea today how close he is. If he has a nuclear weapon, it's a serious problem for America and our friends and allies. 
We know he's got chemical weapons. He said he wouldn't have them, but we know he's got them. Not only does he have them, he used them. He used them in his neighborhood. He used them on his own people. 
We know that he's had connections with Al Qaida. There would be nothing more pleasing to him to be able to use one of these shadowy terrorist networks. He could serve as the armory and the training grounds. They could be the deliverer of weapons, and we would never see his fingerprints. 
We know he's a danger. And that's why I went to the United Nations, to take my explanation there. See, I want the United Nations to succeed. I think it's important in the new threats facing America that we have an international body that has got the backbone necessary to hold people to account. For 11 years, however, this guy has defied the United Nations. Not once, not twice, but 16 times he has said, "Forget it." 
And Mr. Saddam Hussein has got a choice to make as well. He has said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. We expect him not to have weapons of mass destruction. But the Congress spoke with a voice that I hear, and I believe that, if they do not disarm Saddam Hussein, if the United Nations can't act and he himself will not disarm, for the sake of peace and for the sake of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm him. 

Remarks in Savannah, Georgia
November 2, 2002
And therefore, I asked the country to debate an important issue, and that is Iraq and Saddam Hussein. I wanted there to be a honest and open debate in our Congress, reflecting the concerns of the American people. I wanted there to be a debate in international bodies, because I understand that Saddam Hussein is a threat to the American people; he's a threat to our friends; he's a threat to our allies. He said he would not have weapons of mass destruction. And after 11 years of deceit, he has them. He was close at one time to having a nuclear weapon. We don't know how close he is today, but a Saddam Hussein with a nuclear weapon is a grave, grave threat to America and our friends and allies. 
He said he wouldn't have chemical weapons. He has them. But not only has he got them; I want you all to remember, he used them. He not only possesses; he has had a history of using them. And he's used them not only on his neighbors, but he's used them on his own people. This man is coldblooded. He can't stand America. He can't stand our friends. He can't stand freedom. 
And so I went to the United Nations, and I reminded them, for 16 resolutions, resolution after resolution after resolution, Saddam Hussein has defied this international organization. And my point to the U.N. was, we want you to be effective. We want to be able to work with you to help keep the peace. We want you to be the United Nations, not the League of Nations. But if you're unable to act, if you're unable to have the backbone necessary to help us keep the peace by disarming Saddam Hussein, if you can't do it and if Saddam Hussein refuses to do it, then the United States, in the name of peace and in the name of freedom, will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Springfield, Illinois
November 3, 2002
The reason I brought up the threat from Iraq is because I understand the new realities. I see the world the way it is. Saddam Hussein is a threat to America. He's a threat to our friends. He's a man who said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction, yet he has them. He's a man that not only has weapons of mass destruction; he's used them. He's used them in his neighborhood; he's used them on his own people. He can't stand America. He can't stand our friends and allies. 
The President. He is a man who would likely team up with Al Qaida. He could provide the arsenal for one of these shadowy terrorist networks. He would love to use somebody else to attack us and not leave fingerprints behind. 
So I went to the United Nations to say to that august body, "Why don't we join together and hold this man to account? Why don't we hold him to his word? Why don't you, instead of letting him defy you 16 times, why don't you hold Saddam Hussein to account and disarm him?" The United Nations can show us whether it's the United Nations or the League of Nations—their choice to make. 
And Saddam Hussein now has a choice to make. He said he would disarm. He said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. Now the time is coming close where he must do what he says he should do—is going to do. But I'm going to tell you all something. And the Congress spoke with one voice, loud and clear, that if the United Nations cannot fulfill its duty, if it doesn't have the backbone necessary to work together to keep the peace, and if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, in the name of peace and in the name of freedom, the United States will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Bentonville, Arkansas
November 4, 2002
This is a man who hates America. He hates our friends. He can't stand what we believe in. He's had contacts with Al Qaida. Imagine a scenario where an Al Qaida-type organization uses Iraq as an arsenal, a place to get weapons, a place to be trained to use the weapons. Saddam Hussein could use surrogates to come and attack people he hates. 
No, he's a threat, and that's why I went to the United Nations. I went to the United Nations because I want that august body to work to keep the peace. I want that august body to show whether it's got the backbone necessary to hold Mr. Saddam Hussein to account. See, after all, for 11 years, they've passed resolution after resolution after resolution. Sixteen times they've passed resolutions holding this man to account, and 16 times he ignored them. 
And Saddam Hussein has got a choice to make. It's his choice to make. He told the world that he would disarm. We're going to hold him to his word. We expect him to disarm. But for the sake of freedom, and for the sake of peace, if Saddam Hussein won't disarm and if the United Nations is incapable of doing its duty, the United States will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks in Dallas, Texas
November 4, 2002
There is a threat to the United States, and our close friends and allies, in Iraq. The leader of Iraq is a man who for 11 years has deceived the world. He said he wouldn't have weapons of mass destruction. He has weapons of mass destruction. At one time we know for certain he was close to having a nuclear weapon. Imagine Saddam Hussein with a nuclear weapon. Not only has he got chemical weapons, but I want you to remember, he's used chemical weapons. He's used weapons on people in his neighborhood. He's used weapons on people in his own country. This is a man who cannot stand America. He cannot stand what we stand for. He can't stand some of our closest friends and allies. This is a man who has got connections with Al Qaida. Imagine a terrorist network with Iraq as an arsenal and as a training ground, so that a Saddam Hussein could use his shadowy group of people to attack his enemy and leave no fingerprint behind. He's a threat. 
I went to the United Nations to make clear a couple of things: One, he's a threat; and secondly, that this august body has a chance to keep the peace. And yet for 16 resolutions, resolution after resolution after resolution, Saddam Hussein has defied the United Nations. It is now time for the United Nations to choose whether it's going to be an effective peacekeeping organization or whether it's going to be like one of its predecessors, the League of Nations, an empty debating society. It is their choice to make. 
It is Saddam Hussein's choice to make. He's told the world he would not have weapons of mass destruction, and in the name of peace, we expect him to honor that commitment. Should he choose not to honor the commitment, the U.N. is incapable of acting, the United States in the name of peace, in the name of freedom, will lead a coalition and disarm Saddam Hussein. 

The President's News Conference
November 7, 2002
We have a responsibility to protect the American people against threats from any source. I'm grateful to the Members of the Congress, both Republicans and Democrats, that came together to support the war against terror and authorize, if need be, the use of force to disarm Iraq. We must bring the same spirit of bipartisan cooperation to the urgent task of protecting our country from the ongoing threat of terrorist attack.
The President. Well, first of all, the resolution we put down is a tough new resolution. It talks about material breach and inspections and serious consequences if Saddam Hussein continues to defy the world and not disarm. So, one, I'm pleased with the resolution we put down. Otherwise, we wouldn't have put it down. 
And Steve, the resolution is a disarmament resolution; that's what it is. It's a statement of intent to, once and for all, disarm Saddam Hussein. He's a threat. He's a threat to the country. He's a threat to people in his neighborhood. He's a real threat, and it's now time for the world to come together and disarm him. And when this resolution passes, I will—we'll be able to say that the United Nations has recognized the threat, and now we're going to work together to disarm him. 
And he must be cooperative in the disarmament. So the job of inspectors is to determine his level of cooperation, see. He has got to be the agent of disarming. He's got to agree that what we're doing is what he said he would do, and—just like the United Nations has agreed that it is important to disarm him, for the sake of peace. And so the next step will be to put an inspection regime in there to—after all the declarations and after all the preamble to inspections, that he's got to show the world he's disarming. And that's where we'll be next. 
I am insistent upon one thing about Iraq, and that is that Saddam Hussein disarm. That's what I'm insistent on. He agreed to do that, by the way. Saddam Hussein said he would disarm, and he hasn't. And for the—— 
The President. Is that the followup? [Laughter] Okay, that is the followup. I do care about North Korea. And as I said from the beginning of this new war in the 21st century, we'll deal with each threat differently. Each threat requires a different type of response. You've heard my strategy on dealing with Iraq. I've been very clear on the strategy all along, and tomorrow it looks like part of that strategy is coming to fruition. 
The President. Yes. Well, I'm—some people have the right impressions and some people have the wrong impressions. 
The President. Well, those are the wrong impressions. 
The President. I have a deep desire for peace. That's what I have a desire for, and freedom for the Iraqi people. See, I don't like a system where people are repressed through torture and murder in order to keep a dictator in place. It troubles me deeply. And so the Iraqi people must hear this loud and clear, that this country never has any intention to conquer anybody. That's not the intention of the American people or our Government. We believe in freedom, and we believe in peace. And we believe the Iraqi dictator is a threat to peace. And so that's why I made the decisions I made, in terms of Iraq. 
The President. Well, that's like saying we should not go after Al Qaida because we might irritate somebody, and that would create a danger to Americans. My attitude is, you've got to deal with terrorism in a firm way. And if they see threats, you deal with them in all different kinds of ways. 
The only way, in my judgment, to deal with Saddam Hussein is to bring the international community together to convince him to disarm. But if he's not going to disarm, we'll disarm him, in order to make the world a more peaceful place. And some people aren't going to like that—I understand. But some people won't like it if he ends up with a nuclear weapon and uses it. We have an obligation to lead. And I intend to assume that obligation to make the world more peaceful. 
Terry, listen, there's risk in all action we take, but the risk of inaction is not a choice, as far as I'm concerned. The inaction creates more risk than doing our duty to make the world more peaceful. And obviously, I weighed all the consequences about all the differences. Hopefully, we can do this peacefully—don't get me wrong. And if the world were to collectively come together to do so, and to put pressure on Saddam Hussein and convince him to disarm, there's a chance he may decide to do that. 
And war is not my first choice, don't— it's my last choice. But nevertheless, it is a—it is an option in order to make the world a more peaceful place. 
The President. Well, Wendell, this much we know: It's so far taken him 11 years and 16 resolutions to do nothing. And so we've got some kind of history as to the man's behavior. We know he likes to try to deceive and deny, and that's why this inspection regime has got to be new and tough and different. The status quo is unacceptable—you know, kind of send a few people in there and hope maybe he's nice to them and open up the baby milk factory—it's unacceptable. 
And so that's why you'll see us with a different inspection regime, one that works to see to it that Saddam Hussein disarms. It's his responsibility to disarm. I don't put timetables on anything. But for the sake of peace—sooner, better. And we'll see. But you must know that I am serious— so are a lot of other countries—serious about holding the man to account. 
I was serious about holding the U.N. to account. And when they pass this resolution, which I hope they do tomorrow, it shows that the U.N. is beginning to assume its responsibilities to make sure that 11 years of defiance does not go unanswered. It's very important that the U.N. be a successful international body because the threats that we face now require more cooperation than ever. And we're still cooperating with a lot of nations. We're still sharing intelligence and cutting off money the best we can. And there's still law enforcement efforts taking place all around the world. And that's why the international— this international body called the U.N. is an important body for keeping the peace. And it's very important that they're effective. And we'll see tomorrow—starting tomorrow. 
And then the key on the resolution, I want to remind you, is that there are serious consequences. And that's one of the key elements to make sure that everybody gets the picture that we are serious about a process of disarming him in the name of peace. Hopefully, he'll choose to do so himself. 
The President. First of all, broad opposition around the world not in support of my policy on Iraq? 
The President. Well, I think most people around the world realize that Saddam Hussein is a threat. And they—no one likes war, but they also don't like the idea of Saddam Hussein having a nuclear weapon. Imagine what would happen. And by the way, we don't know how close he is to a nuclear weapon right now. We know he wants one. But we don't know. We know he was close to one at one point in time. We have no idea today. Imagine Saddam Hussein with a nuclear weapon. Imagine how the Israeli citizens would feel. Imagine how the citizens in Saudi Arabia would feel. Imagine how the world would change, how he could alter diplomacy by the very presence of a nuclear weapon. 
And so a lot of people—serious people around the world are beginning to think about that consideration. I think about it a lot. I think about it particularly in the regard of making the world a more peaceful place. 
And so it's very important for people to realize the consequences of us not taking the case to the U.N. Security Council. People need to think about what would happen if the United States had remained silent on this issue and just hoped for a change of his attitude or maybe hoped that he would not invade somebody again or just hoped that he wouldn't use gas on his own people when pressure at home began to mount. 
I'm not willing to take those kind of risks. People understand that. I think a lot of people are saying, you know, "Gosh, we hope we don't have war." I feel the same way. I hope we don't have war. I hope this can be done peacefully. It's up to Saddam Hussein, however, to make that choice. 
I also want to remind you that, should we have to use troops, should it become a necessity in order to disarm him, the United States, with friends, will move swiftly with force to do the job. You don't have to worry about that. We will do—we will do—we will do what it takes militarily to succeed. 
I also want to say something else to people of Iraq, that the generals in Iraq must understand clearly there will be consequences for their behavior. Should they choose, if force is necessary, to behave in a way that endangers the lives of their own citizens, as well as citizens in the neighborhood, there will be a consequence. They will be held to account. 
And as to the Iraqi people, what I said before—the Iraqi people can have a better life than the one they have now. They can have a—there are other alternatives to somebody who is willing to rape and mutilate and murder in order to stay in power. There's just a better life than the one they have to live now. 
I think the people of the world understand that too, Judy. I don't take—I don't take—I don't spend a lot of time taking polls around the world to tell me what I think is the right way to act. I've just got to know how I feel. I feel strongly about freedom. I feel strongly about liberty. And I feel strongly about the obligation to make the world a more peaceful place. And I take those responsibilities really seriously. 
The President. No. I think that—I think that if you would read the full—I'm sure he said other sentences. Let me just put it to you: I know George Tenet well; I meet with him every single day; he sees Saddam Hussein as a threat. I don't know what the context of that quote is. I'm telling you, the guy knows what I know, that he is a problem and we must deal with him. 
And you know, it's like people say, "Oh, we must leave Saddam alone. Otherwise, if we did something against him, he might attack us." Well, if we don't do something, he might attack us, and he might attack us with a more serious weapon. The man is a threat, Hutch, I'm telling you. He's a threat not only with what he has; he's a threat with what he's done. He's a threat because he is dealing with Al Qaida. In my Cincinnati speech, I reminded the American people, a true threat facing our country is that an Al Qaida-type network trained and armed by Saddam could attack America and leave not one fingerprint. That is a threat. And we're going to deal with it. 
The debate about whether we're going to deal with Saddam Hussein is over. And now the question is, how do we deal with him? I made the decision to go to the United Nations because I want to try to do this peacefully. I want Saddam to disarm. The best way to convince him to disarm is to get the nations to come together through the U.N. and try to convince him to disarm. 
We're going to work on that. We've been spending a lot of time—I wouldn't exactly call it gnashing of teeth, but working hard on the U.N. resolution. It took a while, but we've been grinding it out, trying to bring a consensus, trying to get people together, so that we can say to the world the international community has spoken through the Security Council of the United Nations, and now, once again, we expect Saddam to disarm. 
This would be the 17th time that we expect Saddam to disarm. This time we mean it. See, that's the difference—I guess. This time it's for real. And I say it must not have been for real the last 16 times because nothing happened when he didn't. This time something happens. He knows— he's got to understand that. The members of the U.N. Security Council understand that. Saddam has got to understand it so he—so in the name of peace, for a peaceful resolution of this, we hope he disarms. 

Remarks on the Passage of a United Nations Security Council Resolution on Iraq
November 8, 2002
Good morning. With the resolution just passed, the United Nations Security Council has met important responsibilities, upheld its principles, and given clear and fair notice that Saddam Hussein must fully disclose and destroy his weapons of mass destruction. He must submit to any and all methods to verify his compliance. His cooperation must be prompt and unconditional, or he will face the severest consequences. 
The world has now come together to say that the outlaw regime in Iraq will notbepermitted to build or possess chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons. That is the judgment of the United States Congress. That is the judgment of the United Nations Security Council. Now the world must insist that that judgment be enforced. 
Iraq's obligation to disarm is not new or even recent. To end the Persian Gulf war and ensure its own survival, Iraq's regime agreed to disarm in April of 1991. For over a decade the Iraqi regime has treated its own pledge with contempt. As today's resolution states, Iraq is already in material breach of past U.N. demands. Iraq has aggressively pursued weapons of mass destruction, even while inspectors were inside the country. Iraq has undermined the effectiveness of weapons inspectors with ploys, delays, and threats, making their work impossible and leading to 4 years of no inspections at all. 
The world has learned from this experience an essential lesson: Inspections will not result in a disarmed Iraq unless the Iraqi regime fully cooperates. Inspectors do not have the power to disarm an unwilling regime. They can only confirm that a government has decided to disarm itself. History has shown that when Iraq's leaders stall inspections and impede the progress, it means they have something to hide. 
The resolution approved today presents the Iraqi regime with a test, a final test. Iraq must now, without delay or negotiations, fully disarm, welcome full inspections, and fundamentally change the approach it has taken for more than a decade. 
The regime must allow immediate and unrestricted access to every site, every document, and every person identified by inspectors. Iraq can be certain that the old game of cheat-and-retreat, tolerated at other times, will no longer be tolerated. Any act of delay or defiance will be an additional breach of Iraq's international obligations and a clear signal that the Iraqi regime has once again abandoned the path of voluntary compliance. 
With the passage of this resolution, the world must not lapse into unproductive debates over whether specific instances of Iraqi noncompliance are serious. Any Iraqi noncompliance is serious because such bad faith will show that Iraq has no intention of disarming. If we're to avert war, all nations must continue to pressure Saddam Hussein to accept this resolution and to comply with its obligations and his obligations. 
America will be making only one determination: Is Iraq meeting the terms of the Security Council resolution or not? The United States has agreed to discuss any material breach with the Security Council, but without jeopardizing our freedom of action to defend our country. If Iraq fails to fully comply, the United States and other nations will disarm Saddam Hussein. 
I've already met with the head of the U.N. inspections program and the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, which has responsibility for nuclear matters. I've assured them that the United States will fully support their efforts, including a request for information that can help identify illegal activities and materials in Iraq. I encourage every member of the United Nations to strongly support the inspection teams. And now the inspectors have an important responsibility to make full use of the tools we have given them in this resolution. 
All patriotic Iraqis should embrace this resolution as an opportunity for Iraq to avoid war and end its isolation. Saddam Hussein cannot hide his weapons of mass destruction from international inspectors without the cooperation of hundreds and thousands of Iraqis, those who work in the weapons program and those who are responsible for concealing the weapons. We callon those Iraqis to convey whatever information they have to inspectors, the United States, or other countries, in whatever manner they can. By helping the process of disarmament, they help their country. 
Americans recognize what is at stake. In fighting a war on terror, we are determined to oppose every source of catastrophic harm that threatens our country, our friends, and our allies. We are actively pursuing dangerous terror networks across the world. And we oppose a uniquely dangerous regime, a regime that has harbored terrorists and can supply terrorists with weapons of mass destruction, a regime that has built such terrible weapons and has used them to kill thousands, a brutal regime with a history of both reckless ambition and reckless miscalculation. 
The United States of America will not live at the mercy of any group or regime that has the motive and seeks the power to murder Americans on a massive scale. The threat to America also threatens peace and security in the Middle East and far beyond. If Iraq's dictator is permitted to acquire nuclear weapons, he could resume his pattern of intimidation and conquest and dictate the future of a vital region. 
In confronting this threat, America seeks the support of the world. If action becomes necessary, we will act in the interests of the world. And America expects Iraqi compliance with all U.N. resolutions. 
The time has come for the Iraqi people to escape oppression, find freedom, and live in hope. 
I want to thank the Secretary of State, Colin Powell, for his leadership, his good work, and his determination over the past 2 months. He's worked tirelessly and successfully for a resolution that recognizes important concerns of our Security Council partners and makes Iraq's responsibilities clear. I also thank our Ambassador to the United Nations, John Negroponte, and his team at our U.N. mission in New York for their hard work and outstanding service to our country. Secretary of State Powell's team has done a fine job. 
The American people are grateful to the Security Council for passing this historic resolution. Members of the Council acted with courage and took a principled stand. The United Nations has shown the kind of international leadership promised by its charter and required by our times. Now comes the hard part. The Security Council must maintain its unity and sense of purpose so that the Iraq regime cannot revert to the strategies of obstruction and deception it used so successfully in the past. 
The outcome of the current crisis is already determined: The full disarmament of weapons of mass destruction by Iraq will occur. The only question for the Iraqi regime is to decide how. The United States prefers that Iraq meet its obligations voluntarily, yet we are prepared for the alternative. In either case, the just demands of the world will be met. 

The President's Radio Address
November 9, 2002
Good morning. This was an important week for our country and for the world. The United Nations Security Council voted for a resolution requiring the Iraqi regime to declare and destroy all weapons of mass destruction or face the consequences. Here at home, our citizens voted in an election I believe will strengthen our ability to get things done for the American people. 
With the United Nations Security Council resolution passed yesterday, the world has now come together to say that the outlaw regime in Iraq will notbepermitted to build or possess chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons. That is the judgment of the United Nations Security Council. That is the judgment of the United States Congress. And my administration will see to it that the world's judgment is enforced. 
The resolution presents the Iraqi regime with a test, a final test. Iraq must now, without delay or negotiations, give up its weapons of mass destruction, welcome full inspections, and fundamentally change the approach it has taken for more than a decade. The regime must allow immediate and unrestricted access to every site, every document, and every person identified by inspectors. Iraq can be certain that the old game of cheat-and-retreat, tolerated at other times, will no longer be tolerated. 
Any act of delay or defiance will be an additional breach of Iraq's international obligations and a clear signal that the Iraqi regime has once again abandoned the path of voluntary compliance. If Iraq fails to fully comply with the U.N. resolution, the United States, in coalition with other nations, will disarm Saddam Hussein. 

Remarks at a Veterans Day Ceremony in Arlington, Virginia
November 11, 2002
This new kind of war also requires us to confront outlaw regimes that seek and possess the tools of mass murder. We will notpermit a dictator who has used weapons of mass destruction to threaten America with chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons. This great Nation will not live at the mercy of any foreign plot or power. The dictator of Iraq will fully disarm, or the United States will lead a coalition and disarm him

Exchange With Reporters at District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department Headquarters
The President. Let's see what Saddam—— 
The President. Then if Saddam Hussein does not comply with the—to the detail of the resolution, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
The President. It's over. We're through negotiations. There's no more time. The man must disarm. He said he would disarm. He now must disarm. And you know, this kind of deception and delay—all that is over with. The country is committed to making the world more peaceful by disarming Saddam Hussein. It's just as simple as that. There's a zero-tolerance policy now. The last 11 years have been a period of time when this guy tried to deceive the world, and we're through with it. It's as simple as that. 
The President. There's no test. This man must disarm. There must be a willingness in his administration to disarm. 
The President. Well, the Iraqi Parliament is nothing but a rubber stamp for Saddam Hussein. There's no democracy. This guy is a dictator, so we'll have to see what he says. 
The President. No response right now.

Remarks Following a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
November 13, 2002
The President. I have told the United Nations we'll be glad to consult with them. But the resolution does not prevent us from doing what needs to be done, which is to hold Saddam Hussein into account. We hope that he disarms. We hope that he will listen to the world. The world has spoken. A diverse group of nations in the Security Council spoke with one voice. The United States Congress spoke with one voice. And that is, in the name of peace, he must disarm. If he chooses not to disarm, we will disarm him. That should be clear to Saddam Hussein and everybody else. And if he chooses not to disarm, we will have a coalition of the willing with us. A lot of nations understand that in order to keep the peace, Saddam Hussein must be disarmed—decisions he makes. 
There's nonegotiations with Mr. Saddam Hussein. Those days are long gone. And so are the days of deceit and denial. And now it's up to him. And I want to remind you all that inspectors are there to determine whether or not Saddam Hussein is willing to disarm. It's his choice to make. And should he choose not to disarm, we will disarm him. 
The President. Zero tolerance—that's about as plain as I can make it. We will not tolerate any deception, denial, or deceit, period

The President's Radio Address
November 16, 2002
To win the war on terror, we're also opposing the growing threat of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of outlaw regimes. This week, the dictator of Iraq told the U.N. he would give weapons inspectors unrestricted access to his country. We've heard such pledges before, and they have been uniformly betrayed. America and the world are now watching Saddam Hussein closely. Any act of defiance or delay will indicate that he is taking the path of deception once again, and this time the consequences would be severe. 
Our goal is not merely the return of inspectors to Iraq; our goal is the disarmament of Iraq. The dictator of Iraq will give up his weapons of mass destruction, or the United States will lead a coalition to disarm him. 

Interview With Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty
November 18, 2002
The President. Well, first of all, I hope we can do this peacefully. And by doing it peacefully, that means I hope Saddam Hussein disarms. Of course, we've hoped that for 11 years. We've hoped that for 16 resolutions. We now have a 17th resolution, and this time I intend to work with nations that love freedom and peace, make sure the resolution stands. And if he doesn't disarm, you're right, I'll lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him. And there's all kinds of ways for that coalition to be formed. It could be formed with NATO, if they choose. I have said to the U.N. Security Council, "We'll go back and discuss the matter with you." But Mr. Saddam Hussein must understand he'll be disarmed one way or the other. I hope it's done peacefully.
It's one of my concerns about Iraq. Listen, we've got people living in Iraq that are tortured and brutalized in order to keep this man in power. I weep for those who suffer.
Interview With Czech Television
November 18, 2002
The President. Well, first, I hope we don't have to go to war with Iraq. I mean, my first choice is not to commit our troops to regime change. I hope that Saddam Hussein does what he said he would do, and that is disarm. For the sake of peace, he must disarm. Most nations understand that—most nations in NATO understand that. They want Saddam to disarm. The U.N. Security Council has spoken and says he must disarm. So it's his choice to make. 
If he refuses to disarm, then we will lead a coalition of the willing and disarm him. And of course, I hope our NATO friends come with us. I think they will realize it's in the interest of peace and stability that that happen. But we're not close to that decision point yet because we're just beginning the process of allowing Saddam the chance to show the world whether or not he will disarm. 
And that's an important distinction the people of the Czech Republic must know. It's not up to me. It's up to him. He said he would disarm, and the inspectors are not the issue. The inspectors are simply a means to determine his willingness. And we'll see. He's had a bad history. He's had 11 years of lying and deceiving, and now itistime to bring him to account, one way or the other. 

Interview With European Journalists
November 18, 2002
And I said—this is the day where I told our Congress we were going to encourage a national debate and dialog on Iraq. And I started to give him my rationale as to why I was thinking about Iraq. He said, "You don't need to talk to me"—this is paraphrasing now—about Iraq. He said, "Our country has watched democracies go soft in the face of totalitarianism, and we lived in slavery for 50 years." 
Now, that's a paraphrase for the American press. But the point I want to make to you is that he was clear about obligations we have. That's what I think about the Baltics. The spirit—and Romania, for that matter, and the Czech Republic, as embodied in the works and thoughts of Vaclav Havel. That's what I think about your country. You know, I firmly believe that—again, I keep repeating myself, but it's on my mind because this is exactly what we're dealing with at the NATO expansion. And this is the concept of how precious freedom is for people. It is a—and it has a lot to do, frankly, with my thinking about Iraq too. 
The President. Oh, yes. Well, first, I appreciate them working together with us on the resolution. The U.N. Security Council sent a clear signal to Iraq and the world. We expect them to disarm, is what the signal said. And actually, the U.N. Security Council sent a signal about themselves, that they want to be relevant. 
You see, if you send out 16 resolutions and all 16 resolutions were ignored, at some point in time, somebody has got to tell the truth and say, "You're not relevant. Why pass a resolution unless you really mean it?" And so we got together, and we said, "Fine, let's pass this significant resolution." And the Russians were helpful and voted for it. And now the word is out, that the U.N. Security Council will be a relevant body. In other words, we intend to enforce the serious consequences if there's not disarmament, and that we're able to work with our friends. I thought that was a very positive thing. 
And I will tell this to Vladimir Putin. It's probably better for me to tell him, but not through your newspapers, but I'll try anyway. The issue is not inspectors. The issue is disarmament. That's the issue. And the question is, will Saddam Hussein disarm? That's what the U.N. Security Council has said, once again, with Russian support, along with other—a lot of other countries. And so he must show us whether or not he'll disarm, for the sake of peace. 
And if he doesn't, then we, of course, will consult, like we said we would do— we'd hold a meeting. But the interesting thing about the U.N. Security Council resolution is, all countries are free to act. And that was explained to Vladimir what my sentiments—I'm very strong about. This is not a—this isn't a free pass for Saddam, now that the resolution has been passed. Quite the contrary. We expect him to disarm. And we expect him to do everything he can to disarm. And we expect him to be cooperating in his disarmament for the sake of peace. 
And that's what the U.N. Security Council said to me, that people now have finally come to the conclusion that itistime now to deal with the issue. Hopefully, this can get done peacefully. But it's up to Mr. Saddam Hussein, and we'll see. itistime for him to declare if he's got any weapons. And we'll proceed from there. 
The President. I will—first of all, I believe that the NATO Alliance understands the issue. The countries there would like to see a disarmed Saddam Hussein. They— a peaceful country, they believe in peace, just like I believe in peace. And a Saddam Hussein with weapons of mass destruction is—particularly since he's used them in the past, and he clearly can't stand America and many of our friends—would mean it would be likely for us not to have peace. 
Imagine a Saddam Hussein with a nuclear weapon. It's certainly not an ingredient for peace, quite the contrary. And so the NATO countries understand that. And if, in fact, military action is needed, we'll consult with them, and everybody will be able to make a decision that they're comfortable with. But I wouldn't preclude a peaceful settlement. I hope it happens peacefully. But if it doesn't, just—people will know that our intent is to lead a coalition of like-minded, freedom-loving countries, a coalition of the willing to disarm Saddam Hussein. And one way or the other, he's going to be disarmed, and it's in everybody's interest that that be the case. 

Interview With Russia's NTV
November 18, 2002
The President. Well, first, I hope that all the ifs don't happen. I mean, I hope that Mr. Saddam Hussein disarms, like he said he would do. But the problem is, he said he would do it for 11 years, and he hasn't done anything for 11 years. I mean, in the name of peace he should disarm. And so we're working with Russia and other members of the United Nations Security Council to send a clear message to Mr. Saddam Hussein that we expect you to disarm. 
If he doesn't disarm, then we'll disarm him in the name of peace. And of course, we'll be interested in all interests. We have no desire to run the show, to run the country. We will work to encourage the development of new leadership, should this happen, that will recognize the rights of all citizens that live in this country, that will keep the territorial integrity of Iraq intact. And we understand Russia has got interests there, as do other countries. And of course, those interests will be honored. 

The President's News Conference With President Vaclav Havel of the Czech Republic in Prague, Czech Republic
November 20, 2002
We did talk about Iraq. There is universal recognition that Saddam Hussein is a threat to world peace. There's clear understanding that he must disarm in the name of peace. And we hope he chooses to do so. Tomorrow we'll discuss the issue. We'll consider what happens if he chooses not to disarm. But one thing is certain: He'll be disarmed, one way or the other, in the name of peace. 
Secondly, as to Iraq, it's very important for our nations, as well as all free nations, to work collectively to see to it that Saddam Hussein disarms. If the collective will of the world is strong, we can achieve disarmament peacefully. However, should he choose not to disarm, the United States will lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him. And at that point in time, all our nations—we will consult with our friends, and all nations will be able to choose whether or not they want to participate
President Bush. Well, first, thank you for the "if we should go to war against Iraq." War is my last choice, my last option. I hope we can do this peacefully. 
It is possible that Saddam Hussein gets the message that we're serious about disarmament and he should fully disarm. That's possible. The possibility becomes more real if he understands that there is a true consequence for his failure to disarm. And there is a true consequence. There's a serious consequence, as the U.N. resolution addresses. 
Of course, the key reason we're here is to talk about NATO expansion and the benefits of NATO expansion, not only to encourage the spread of freedom in Europe but also to be able to deal with the true threats we face in order to defend our freedoms. And my answer, as far as Iraq goes, is exactly what I've said previously: If the decision is made to use military force, we will consult with our friends, and we hope that our friends will join us. 
President Bush. Well, I think there is— we were talking about whether or not Saddam Hussein, you know, shooting at our airplanes, what that means—we'll deal with that. The United States will take appropriate action. 
The thing that's important to—for people to understand is, what we want to see is whether or not he's going to cooperate, whether or not he's heard what the world has said—whether or not he's heard what the world has said through the U.N. Security Council resolution. 
See, what happens is, people tend to focus on the inspectors as if the inspectors are the end. The final—the thing that's important, the final point of determination is whether or not he is disarmed. 
So, what we're going to be looking for, and I hope the world joins us, is whether or not this man is cooperating with the will of the world. See, the world has recognized—many members of NATO have recognized that a Saddam Hussein and Iraq which possesses weapons of mass destruction is dangerous. Imagine a Saddam Hussein with a nuclear weapon. It's important for the Czech people to understand this is guy who has poisoned his own people. He's got such hate in his heart, he's willing to use a weapon of mass destruction not only on his neighborhood but on the people of his country. 
He is a danger. And so, therefore, what we're looking for is to determine whether or not he is willing to cooperate, whether or not he has got the message that he must disarm. 
The United Nations has said 16 different times, "You must disarm." And 16 times, he's said, "Oh, of course, I will," but never did. And so, the game's over with. We're through with that. And now he's going to disarm, one way or the other. In the name of peace, he will be disarmed. 

Remarks to the Prague Atlantic Student Summit in Prague
November 20, 2002
Today, the world is also uniting to answer the unique and urgent threat posed by Iraq. A dictator who has used weapons of mass destruction on his own people must notbeallowed to produce or possess those weapons. We will notpermit Saddam Hussein to blackmail and/or terrorize nations which love freedom. 
Last week Saddam Hussein accepted U.N. inspectors. We've heard those pledges before and seen them violated time and time again. We now call an end to that game of deception and deceit and denial. Saddam Hussein has been given a very short time to declare completely and truthfully his arsenal of terror. Should he again deny that this arsenal exists, he will have entered his final stage with a lie. And deception this time will not be tolerated. Delay and defiance will invite the severest of consequences. 
America's goal, the world's goal is more than the return of inspectors to Iraq. Our goal is to secure the peace through the comprehensive and verified disarmament of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. Voluntary or by force, that goal will be achieved. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom and an Exchange With Reporters in Prague, Czech Republic
November 21, 2002
President Bush. Well, my expectation is, is that we can do this peacefully, if Saddam Hussein disarms. That's my expectation. Saddam Hussein has got a decision to make: Will he uphold the agreement that he has made? And if he chooses to do so by disarming peacefully, the world will be better off for it. If he chooses not to disarm, we will work with our close friends, the closest of which is Great Britain, and we will disarm him. But our first choice is not to use the military option. Our first choice is for Mr. Saddam Hussein to disarm. And that's where we'll be devoting a lot of our energies.

Remarks Following Discussions With President Vladimir Putin of Russia and an Exchange With Reporters in St. Petersburg, Russia
November 22, 2002
President Bush. A couple of points. First, I want to thank Vladimir and his foreign policy team for working together to pass a strong resolution out of the United Nations on Iraq

The President's Radio Address
November 23, 2002
On my trip this week here in Europe, I'm consulting with our friends and NATO Allies about the new threats to freedom that we face together. Today, the United States is joined by more than 90 nations in a global coalition against terrorism, sharing intelligence, cutting off terrorist finance, and pursuing the terrorists where they plot and train. The world is also uniting to answer the unique and urgent threat posed by Iraq, whose dictator has already used weapons of mass destruction to kill thousands. We must not and will notpermit either terrorists or tyrants to blackmail freedom-loving nations.

Remarks to the People of Romania in Bucharest
November 23, 2002
An aggressive dictator now rules in Iraq. By his search for terrible weapons, by his ties to terror groups, by his development of prohibited ballistic missiles, the dictator of Iraq threatens the security of every free nation, including the free nations of Europe. The United Nations Security Council and now NATO have spoken with one voice: The Iraqi regime will completely disarm itself of weapons of mass murder, or we, the United States, will lead a coalition of willing nations and disarm that regime in the name of peace.

Remarks on Signing the Bob Stump National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2003 in Arlington, Virginia
December 2, 2002
Saddam Hussein's regime has a long history of aggression against his neighbors and hostility towards America. It has a long history of ties to terrorists. The dictator has a long history of seeking biological and chemical and nuclear weapons, even while U.N. inspectors were present in his country. Now the world has told him the game is over. The U.N. Security Council, the NATO Alliance, and the United States are united. Saddam Hussein will fully disarm himself of weapons of mass destruction, and if he does not, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
As the U.N. weapons inspections process gets underway, we must remember that inspections will not—will only work—will only work if Iraq fully complies. You see, the inspectors are not in Iraq to play hideand-seek with Mr. Saddam Hussein. Inspectors do not have the duty or the ability to uncover terrible weapons hidden in a vast country. The responsibility of inspectors is simply to confirm the evidence of voluntary and total disarmament. It is Saddam Hussein who has the responsibility to provide that evidence as directed and in full. Any act of delay, deception, or defiance will prove that Saddam Hussein has not adopted the path of compliance and has rejected the path of peace. 
In the inspections process, the United States will be making one judgment: Has Saddam Hussein changed his behavior of the last 11 years? Has he decided to cooperate willingly and comply completely, or has he not? So far the signs are not encouraging. A regime that fires upon American and British pilots is not taking the path of compliance. A regime that sends letters filled with protests and falsehoods is not taking the path of compliance. 
On or before the 8th of December, Iraq must provide a full and accurate declaration of its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs. That declaration must be credible and complete, or the Iraqi dictator will have demonstrated to the world once again that he has chosen not to change his behavior. 
Americans seek peace in this world. We're a peaceful nation. War is the last option for confronting threats. Yet the temporary peace of denial and looking away from danger would only be a prelude to broader war and greater horror. America will confront gathering dangers early, before our options become limited and desperate. By showing ourresolve today, we are building a future of peace. 
In the decisions and missions to come, our military will carry the values of America and the hopes of the world. The people of Iraq, like all human beings, deserve their freedom. And the people of Afghanistan, with the help of the United States Armed Forces, have gained their freedom. 

Remarks at a Luncheon for Senatorial Candidate Suzanne Haik Terrell in New Orleans, Louisiana
December 3, 2002
And that's why I started talking about Iraq and Saddam Hussein, not only starting a debate in the Halls of the United States Congress, which overwhelmingly supported any meansnecessary to deal with the threat to the United States, but also took the debate to the United Nations and a couple of weeks ago to NATO. 
It's important for our fellow Americans to understand that, when we're talking about Saddam Hussein, we're talking about a man who said he has had no weapons of mass destruction, yet we believe has weapons of mass destruction; a man who has not only had weapons of mass destruction, but he's used weapons of mass destruction. He used weapons of mass destruction on his neighbors, and he used weapons of mass destruction on his own citizens. He's a man who has professed hate to America as well as our friends and allies. He's a man who has got terrorist ties, a man who helps train terrorists. He's a threat, and he's a danger. 
I went to the United Nations because I felt like, in a world that required cooperation in this new war of the 21st century, that it was important the United Nations show some backbone, that the United Nations be something other than an empty debating society, that when they issue a resolution, they mean it. And on a 15-0 vote, the United Nations recognized the threat of Saddam Hussein and demanded that he disarm. 
I then went to our close Allies in NATO and said the same thing. I said, "This man's a threat. He's a threat to us. He's a threat to you. He too must disarm." And now, as you've seen in your newspapers, inspectors are inside of Iraq. Inspectors are there not to play hide-and-seek with Mr. Saddam Hussein. Inspectors are there to verify the will of the world. And the will of the world says clearly, "Disarm." Saddam Hussein, for the sake of peace, must disarm. And if he refuses to disarm, if he tries to deceive his way out of disarmament, this Nation, along with other willing nations, will disarm Saddam Hussein

Remarks in Shreveport, Louisiana
December 3, 2002
And that's why I elevated the issue of Iraq. That's why I took our message of peace and freedom to countries around the world. I want them to understand the nature of the man who runs Iraq is the nature of a man who doesn't tell the truth. He says he won't have weapons of mass destruction. He's got them. He's not only got them; he's used them. And he's not only used them in his neighborhood; he's used them on his own people. That's the nature of the man with whom we deal. For 11 long years, he has deceived and denied. 
So I went to the United Nations. I said, "When is enough enough?" They voted 15 to nothing to say, "Now enough is enough." The members of the Security Council had a chance, and they accepted the challenge to make sure that this United Nations became an effective body when it comes to keeping the peace, not an empty debating society. 
Then I went to NATO—strong Allies in NATO—and overwhelmingly the message was, "Enough is enough." And now there's inspectors inside this country. But I want to tell you, the issue is not the inspectors. The issue is whether or not Mr. Saddam Hussein will disarm like he said he would. We're not interested in hide-and-seek inside Iraq. The fundamental question is, in the name of peace, in the name of security, not only for America and the American people, in the name of security for our friends in the neighborhood, in the name of freedom, will this man disarm? The choice is his. And if he does not disarm, the United States of America will lead a coalition and disarm him in the name of peace. 

Remarks on Signing the Dot Kids Implementation and Efficiency Act of 2002 and an Exchange With Reporters
December 4, 2002
The President. Yes. Well, I can tell you this: This isn't about inspectors. The issue is whether Saddam Hussein will disarm. Will he disarm in the name of peace? And we expect him to fully comply. And you know, one of my concerns is that in the past he has shot at our airplanes. Anybody who shoots at U.S. airplanes or British airplanes is not somebody who looks like he's interested in complying with disarmament. He wrote letters, stinging rebukes to what the U.N. did. He was very critical of the U.S. and Britain. That doesn't appear to be somebody who was that anxious to comply. 
But we've just started the process. And one of the things that I want to continue to remind Americans, this is not a game that we're playing of hide-and-seek. This is our attempt to work with the world community to create peace. And the best way for peace is for Mr. Saddam Hussein to disarm. It's up to him to make his decision. 
The President. We've been at this— what—5 days. This is after 11 years of deceit and defiance. And the issue, again, is not hide-and-seek; the issue is whether or not Saddam Hussein will disarm. And soon he'll be making a declaration of whether he has any weapons. For years he said he didn't have any weapons. And now we'll see whether or not he does. And if he does, we expect them to be completely destroyed and a full accounting. 
And I remind our citizens that the U.N. Security Council voted overwhelmingly, 15 to nothing, for this approach we've taken. Our NATO Allies have joined us, and we all expect Saddam Hussein to disarm. 
The President. What I agree with is that we've been doing this for 5 days, after 11 years of deception and deceit. The process is just beginning. And the world will determine soon whether or not Saddam Hussein is going to do what we've asked, which is, in the name of peace, fully disarm. This is not a game anymore of, "Well, I'll say one thing and do another." We expect him to disarm. And now it's up to him to do so. And time will tell whether or not he is willing to do so. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Daniel T. arap Moi of Kenya and Prime Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia and an Exchange With Reporters
December 5, 2002
President Bush. Right. That's the question that you should ask to Saddam Hussein. [Laughter] It's his choice to make. And Saddam Hussein must disarm. The international community has come together through the United Nations Security Council and voted 15 to nothing for Saddam Hussein to disarm. We recently got back from NATO, where our NATO Allies voted overwhelmingly to send the same message. 
So David, to answer your question, the question is whether or not he chooses to disarm, and we hope he does. For the sake of peace, he must disarm. 
There are inspectors inside the country now, and the inspectors are there not to play a game of hide-and-seek, but they're there to verify whether or not Mr. Saddam Hussein is going to disarm. And we hope he does. 
President Bush. We hope he does. You'll see. 

The President's Radio Address
December 7, 2002
Good morning. This weekend is the deadline for the Iraqi regime to fully disclose to the U.N. Security Council all of its weapons of mass destruction. Disarming that regime is a central commitment of the war on terror. We must and we will prevent terrorist groups and outlaw regimes from threatening the American people with catastrophic harm. 
Saddam Hussein has been under a duty to disarm for more than a decade, yet he has consistently and systematically violated that obligation and undermined U.N. inspections. And he only admitted to a massive biological weapons program after being confronted with the evidence. 
Now the U.N. Security Council and the United States have told Saddam Hussein: The game is over. Saddam Hussein will fully disarm himself of weapons of mass destruction, and if he does not, America will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
As the new inspections process proceeds, the United States will be making only one judgment: Has Saddam Hussein changed his behavior of the last 11 years and decided to cooperate willingly and comply completely, or has he not? 
Inspections will work only if Iraq complies fully and in good faith. Inspectors do not have the duty or the ability to uncover terrible weapons hidden in a vast country. The responsibility of inspectors is simply to confirm evidence of voluntary and total disarmament. Saddam Hussein has the responsibility to provide that evidence, as directed and in full. 
The world expects more than Iraq's cooperation with inspectors. The world expects and requires Iraq's complete, willing, and prompt disarmament. It is not enough for Iraq to merely open doors for inspectors. Compliance means bringing all requested information and evidence out into full view to show that Iraq has abandoned the deceptions of the last decade. Any act of delay or defiance will prove that Saddam Hussein has not adopted the path of compliance and has rejected the path of peace. 
Thus far we are not seeing the fundamental shift in practice and attitude that the world is demanding. Iraq's letters to the U.N. regarding inspections show that their attitude is grudging and conditional. And in recent days, Iraq has fired on American and British pilots enforcing the U.N.'s no-fly zone. 
Iraq is now required by the United Nations to provide a full and accurate declaration of its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs. We will judge the declaration's honesty and completeness only after we have thoroughly examined it, and that will take some time. The declaration must be credible and accurate and complete, or the Iraqi dictator will have demonstrated to the world once again that he has chosen not to change his behavior. 
Americans seek peace in the world. War is the last option for confronting threats, yet the temporary peace of denial and looking away from danger would only be a prelude to a broader war and greater horror. America will confront gathering dangers early. By showing ourresolve today, we are building a future of peace. 

Remarks Announcing the Nomination of William Donaldson To Be Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission
December 10, 2002
The President. Have a good day.

Remarks Following Discussions With the Quartet Principals and an Exchange With Reporters
December 20, 2002
President Bush. One thing is for certain: We will fulfill the terms and conditions of 1441. The world spoke clearly that we expect Mr. Saddam Hussein to disarm. Yesterday's document was not encouraging. We expected him to show that he would disarm. And as the Secretary of State said, it's—it's a long way from there. And we're serious about keeping the peace. We're serious about working with our friends in the United Nations so that this body, ably led by Kofi Annan, has got relevance as we go into the 21st century. And yesterday was a disappointing day for those who have longed for peace.

The President's Radio Address
December 28, 2002
The war on terror also requires us to confront the danger of catastrophic violence posed by Iraq and its weapons of mass destruction. The United Nations Security Council has unanimously affirmed that Saddam Hussein is a danger to his neighbors and to the peace of the world. The burden now is on Iraq's dictator to disclose and destroy his arsenal of weapons. If he refuses, then for the sake of peace, the United States will lead a coalition to disarm the Iraqi regime and free the Iraqi people

Exchange With Reporters in Crawford, Texas
December 31, 2002
The President. Well, first of all, I think it's important to remember that Saddam Hussein was close to having a nuclear weapon. We don't know whether or not he has a nuclear weapon. We do expect him to disarm his weapons of mass destruction; that's what we expect. 
Secondly, the international community has been trying to resolve the situation in Iraq through diplomacy for 11 years. And for 11 years, Saddam Hussein has defied the international community. And now we've brought the world together to send a clear signal: We expect him to disarm, to get rid of his weapons of mass destruction. The first step in determining whether or not he would do that was discouraging. His declaration was short, and the international community recognized that, that he wasn't forthcoming. 
Again, I hope this Iraq situation will be resolved peacefully. One of my New Year's resolutions is to work to deal with these situations in a way so that they're resolved peacefully. But thus far, it appears that, on first look, that Saddam Hussein hasn't heard the message. 
The President. An attack from Saddam Hussein or a surrogate of Saddam Hussein would cripple our economy. My biggest job and most important job is to protect the security of the American people, and I am going to do that. And I have made the case and will continue to make the case that Saddam Hussein—a Saddam Hussein with weapons of mass destruction is a threat to the security of the American people. 
The President. This economy cannot afford to stand an attack. And I'm going to protect the American people. The economy is strong; it's resilient. Obviously, so long as somebody is looking for work, we've got to continue to make it strong and resilient. My most important job is to protect America and Americans, and I take that job seriously. And that's exactly what this administration is going to do
And we hope to resolve all the situations in which we find ourselves in a peaceful way. And so that's my commitment, to try to do so peacefully. But I want to remind people that Saddam Hussein—the choice is his to make as to whether or not the Iraqi situation is resolved peacefully. 
You said we're headed to war in Iraq. I don't know why you say that. I hope we're not headed to war in Iraq. I'm the person who gets to decide, not you, and I hope this can be done peacefully. We've got a military presence there to remind Saddam Hussein, however, that when I say we will lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him if he chooses not to disarm, I mean it. 

Exchange With Reporters in Crawford
January 2, 2003

One country is Iraq. Obviously, we expect them to live up to the U.N. Security resolutions and disarm. And if they won't, we'll lead a coalition to disarm them
The President. First of all, you know, I'm hopeful we won't have to go war, and let's leave it at that. 
The President. Until Saddam Hussein makes up his mind to disarm—see, it's his choice to make. See, you need to ask him that question, not me. 
The President. Well, let's leave it at "if," for a while then, until it happens. 
The President. I thought that was the question I answered yesterday, so we'll go back to that question, Heidi. I mean, Holly. 
The President. He is a man who likes to play games and charades. The question is, will Saddam Hussein disarm? The world has asked him to disarm from weapons of mass destruction. The first indication isn't very positive that he will voluntarily disarm. After all, he put out a declaration that the world realized was false. And the inspectors are there to verify whether or not he is disarming. You hear these reports about Iraqi scientists being interviewed, but there's a "minder" in the room. 
You know, Saddam Hussein—hopefully he realizes we're serious, and hopefully he disarms peacefully. He's a danger to the American people. He's a danger to our friends and allies. For 11 long years, the world has dealt with him. And now he's got to understand, his day of reckoning is coming. And therefore, he must disarm voluntarily. I hope he does. 

Remarks to the Troops at Fort Hood, Texas
January 3, 2003
In the case of Iraq, the world has already spoken with one voice. The Iraqi regime has a duty under Security Council resolutions to declare and destroy all of its weapons of mass destruction. That's what the world has said. That's what the United States expects from Saddam Hussein. 
The Iraqi regime is a grave threat to the United States. The Iraqi regime is a threat to any American and to threats who are friends of America. Why do I say that?Well, first of all, the leader in Iraq has publicly proclaimed his hatred for our country and what we stand for. 
The Iraqi regime has a record—a record of torturing their own people, a brutal record, and a record of reckless aggression against those in their neighborhood. 
The Iraqi regime has used weapons of mass destruction. They not only had weapons of mass destruction; they used weapons of mass destruction. They used weapons of mass destruction on people in other countries; they have used weapons of mass destruction on their own people. That's why I say Iraq is a threat, a real threat. 
Four years ago, U.N. inspectors concluded that Iraq had failed to amount— account for large stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons, weapons capable of killing millions. In last month's declaration, Iraq again failed to account for those weapons. 
The Iraqi dictator did not even attempt to submit a credible declaration. We can now be certain that he holds the United Nations and the U.N. Security Council and its resolutions in contempt. He really doesn't care about the opinion of mankind. Saddam Hussein was given a path to peace. Thus far, he has chosen the path of defiance. 
The fate of the Iraqi regime is being determined by its own decisions. Saddam Hussein knows precisely what he can and must do to avoid conflict. We have made that clear. The world has spoken with one voice. 
And even now, he could end his defiance and dramatically change directions. He has that choice to make. We certainly prefer voluntary compliance by Iraq. You see, the use of military force is this Nation's last option, its last choice. 
Yet, if force becomes necessary to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction and enforce the will of the United Nations, if force becomes necessary to secure our country and to keep the peace, America will act deliberately, America will act decisively, and America will prevail because we've got the finest military in the world. 
The President. We are ready. We're prepared. And should the United States be compelled to act, our troops will be acting in the finest traditions of America—should we be forced to act. Should Saddam Hussein seals his fate by refusing to disarm, by ignoring the opinion of the world, you will be fighting not to conquer anybody but to liberate people. 
See, we believe in freedom. No matter what their oppressors may say, the people of Iraq have no love for tyranny. Like all human beings, they desire and they deserve to live in liberty and to live in dignity. America seeks more than the defeat of terror. We seek the advance of human freedom in a world at peace. That is the charge history has given us, and that is the charge we will keep. 

Remarks Following a Cabinet Meeting and an Exchange With Reporters
January 6, 2003
The President. Well, I thought that was an interesting statement on his part. When you combine that with the fact that his declaration was clearly deficient, it is discouraging news for those of us who want to resolve this issue peacefully. 
He has the obligation to disarm. For the sake of peace, he must disarm. The United Nations has clearly said that. It is in our Nation's interest that he disarm. He is a threat to the American people. He's a threat to our friends and neighbors in the Middle East. He is a person who has used weapons of mass destruction. And so, therefore, the world has said to Saddam, "You won't have any weapons of mass destruction. Get rid of them." And thus far, it looks like he hasn't complied. 
But he's got time, and we continue to callupon Saddam Hussein to listen to what the world is saying. Not just the United States but the entire world expects Saddam Hussein to disarm. 

Remarks to the Economic Club of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois
January 7, 2003
We're also confronting the outlaw regime in Iraq that lives by violence and deception and is arming to threaten the civilized world. The world's demands are clear: For the sake of peace, Saddam Hussein must disarm himself of all weapons of mass destruction and prove that he has done so. Should he choose the other course, in the name of peace, the United States will lead a coalition of the willing to disarm the Iraqi regime of weapons of mass destruction and free the Iraqi people.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Economists and an Exchange With Reporters
January 21, 2003
The President. Well, Adam, first of all, it's important for the American citizens and the citizens around the world to understand that Saddam Hussein possesses some of the world's deadliest weapons. He poses a serious threat to America and our friends and allies. The world came together, including the French, to say he must disarm. He's not disarming. As a matter of fact, it appears to be a rerun of a bad movie. He is delaying. He is deceiving. He is asking for time. He's playing hide-and-seek with inspectors. 
One thing is for certain, he's not disarming. So the United States of America, in the name of peace, will continue to insist he does disarm, and we will keep the pressure on Saddam Hussein. 
The President. It's clear to me now that he is not disarming. And surely, our friends have learned lessons from the past. Surely we have learned how this man deceives and delays. He's giving people the runaround. And as many of my advisers said on TV this week, time is runningout. I believe in the name of peace, he must disarm. And we will lead a coalition of willing nations to disarm him. Make no mistake about that, he will be disarmed. 
The President. I will let you know when the moment has come. [Laughter] 
The United States has made it clear our intention, and our intention is to work with the world for Saddam to disarm. He's been given ample time to disarm. We have had ample time now to see that the tricks of the past—he's employing the tricks of the past today. He's giving people the runaround. He wants to play hide-and-seek. He's got a vast country. 
He wants to focus the attention of the world on inspectors. This is not about inspectors; this is about a disarmed Iraq. He has weapons of mass destruction, the world's deadliest weapons, which pose a direct threat to the United States, our citizens, and our friends and allies. He has been told to disarm for 11 long years. He's not disarming. 
This business about, you know, more time—you know, how much time do we need to see clearly that he's not disarming? As I said, this looks like a rerun of a bad movie, and I'm not interested in watching it. 

Remarks on the National Economy in St. Louis, Missouri
January 22, 2003
We've got an obligation to our children to hunt these people down. We've also got an obligation to our children to address problems before they come back to America, and in my judgment, in my considered judgment, there is a real risk to America and our friends and allies in Iraq. 
The dictator of Iraq has got weapons of mass destruction. He has used weapons of mass destruction. He can't stand America and what we stand for. He can't stand our friends and allies. He's a dangerous, dangerous man with dangerous, dangerous weapons. And that's why the world came together at the United Nations Security Council and said Mr. Saddam Hussein must disarm. The message was as clear as can possibly be delivered: Mr. Saddam Hussein must disarm. 
And the first step of that disarmament was for him to make a declaration of his weapons. Twelve thousand pages of deceit and deception were placed at the U.N. Security Council. We know what it means to disarm. We know what a disarmed regime does. We know how a disarmed regime accounts for weapons of mass destruction. Saddam Hussein is not disarming, like the world has told him he must do. He's a dangerous man with dangerous weapons. He's a danger to America and our friends and allies. And that's why the world has said, "Disarm." 
But Saddam Hussein has learned lessons from the past. See, the first time he was told to disarm was 11 years ago. He is adept at deception and delays and denying. He asked for more time so he can give the so-called inspectors more runaround. He's interested in playing hide-and-seek in a huge country. He's not interested in disarming. 
I hope the world has learned the lessons from the past, just like Saddam Hussein has learned the lessons from the past but in a different way. itistime for us to hold the world to account and for Saddam to be held to account. We must not be fooled by the ways of the past. After all, we just discovered undeclared chemical warheads in Iraq. It's incredibly troubling and disturbing for a man—that is evidence of a man not disarming. 
He wants to play a game. For the sake of peace, we must not let him play a game. And so the resolutions of the Security Council will be enforced. 
My hope is that Saddam Hussein will disarm voluntarily. That's my hope. I take seriously the commitment of any troop into combat. I desire peace. But in the name of peace, in the name of securing our future, if Saddam Hussein will not disarm, the United States of America and friends of freedom will disarm Saddam Hussein. 
And should that path be forced upon us, there will be serious consequences. There will be serious consequences for the dictator in Iraq, and there will be serious consequences for any Iraqi general or soldier who were to use weapons of mass destruction on our troops or on innocent lives within Iraq. Should any Iraqi officer or soldier receive an order from Saddam Hussein or his sons or any of the killers who occupy the high levels of their Government, my advice is, don't follow that order. Because if you choose to do so, when Iraq is liberated, you will be treated, tried, and persecuted as a war criminal. 
And there will be serious consequences—should we be forced into action, there will be serious consequences for the Iraqi people, and that's freedom, freedom from oppression—freedom from oppression, freedom from torture, freedom from murder, freedom to realize your God-given talents.

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 28, 2003
America is making a broad and determined effort to confront these dangers. We have called on the United Nations to fulfill its charter and stand by its demand that Iraq disarm. We're strongly supporting the International Atomic Energy Agency in its mission to track and control nuclear materials around the world. We're working with other governments to secure nuclear materials in the former Soviet Union and to strengthen global treaties banning the production and shipment of missile technologies and weapons of mass destruction. 
In all these efforts, however, America's purpose is more than to follow a process; it is to achieve a result, the end of terrible threats to the civilized world. All free nations have a stake in preventing sudden and catastrophic attacks. And we're asking them to join us, and many are doing so. Yet the course of this Nation does not depend on the decisions of others. Whateveraction is required, whenever actionisnecessary, I will defend the freedom and security of the American people. 
Our Nation and the world must learn the lessons of the Korean Peninsula and notallow an even greater threat to rise up in Iraq. A brutal dictator, with a history of reckless aggression, with ties to terrorism, with great potential wealth, will notbepermitted to dominate a vital region and threaten the United States. 
Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein faced the prospect of being the last casualty in a war he had started and lost. To spare himself, he agreed to disarm of all weapons of mass destruction. For the next 12 years, he systematically violated that agreement. He pursued chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons, even while inspectors were in his country. Nothing to date has restrained him from his pursuit of these weapons, not economic sanctions, not isolation from the civilized world, not even cruise missile strikes on his military facilities. 
Almost 3 months ago, the United Nations Security Council gave Saddam Hussein his final chance to disarm. He has shown instead utter contempt for the United Nations and for the opinion of the world. The 108 U.N. inspectors were sent to conduct— were not sent to conduct a scavenger hunt for hidden materials across a country the size of California. The job of the inspectors is to verify that Iraq's regime is disarming. It is up to Iraq to show exactly where it is hiding its banned weapons, lay those weapons out for the world to see, and destroy them as directed. Nothing like this has happened. 
The United Nations concluded in 1999 that Saddam Hussein had biological weapons sufficient to produce over 25,000 liters of anthrax, enough doses to kill several million people. He hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed it. 
The United Nations concluded that Saddam Hussein had materials sufficient to produce more than 38,000 liters of botulinum toxin, enough to subject millions of people to death by respiratory failure. He hasn't accounted for that material. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed it. 
Our intelligence officials estimate that Saddam Hussein had the materials to produce as much as 500 tons of sarin, mustard, and VX nerve agent. In such quantities, these chemical agents could also kill untold thousands. He's not accounted for these materials. He has given no evidence that he has destroyed them. 
U.S. intelligence indicates that Saddam Hussein had upwards of 30,000 munitions capable of delivering chemical agents. Inspectors recently turned up 16 of them, despite Iraq's recent declaration denying their existence. Saddam Hussein has not accounted for the remaining 29,984 of these prohibited munitions. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed them. 
From three Iraqi defectors we know that Iraq, in the late 1990s, had several mobile biological weapons labs. These are designed to produce germ warfare agents and can be moved from place to a place to evade inspectors. Saddam Hussein has not disclosed these facilities. He's given no evidence that he has destroyed them. 
The International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed in the 1990s that Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program, had a design for a nuclear weapon, and was working on five different methods of enriching uranium for a bomb. The British Government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa. Our intelligence sources tell us that he has attempted to purchase high-strength aluminum tubes suitable for nuclear weapons production. Saddam Hussein has not credibly explained these activities. He clearly has much to hide. 
The dictator of Iraq is not disarming. To the contrary, he is deceiving. From intelligence sources we know, for instance, that thousands of Iraqi security personnel are at work hiding documents and materials from the U.N. inspectors, sanitizing inspection sites, and monitoring the inspectors themselves. Iraqi officials accompany the inspectors in order to intimidate witnesses. Iraq is blocking U-2 surveillance flights requested by the United Nations. Iraqi intelligence officers are posing as the scientists inspectors are supposed to interview. Real scientists have been coached by Iraqi officials on what to say. Intelligence sources indicate that Saddam Hussein has ordered that scientists who cooperate with U.N. inspectors in disarming Iraq will be killed, along with their families. 
Year after year, Saddam Hussein has gone to elaborate lengths, spent enormous sums, taken great risks to build and keep weapons of mass destruction. But why? The only possible explanation, the only possible use he could have for those weapons, is to dominate, intimidate, or attack. 
With nuclear arms or a full arsenal of chemical and biological weapons, Saddam Hussein could resume his ambitions of conquest in the Middle East and create deadly havoc in that region. And this Congress and the American people must recognize another threat. Evidence from intelligence sources, secret communications, and statements by people now in custody reveal that Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaida. Secretly and without fingerprints, he could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists or help them develop their own. 
Before September the 11th, many in the world believed that Saddam Hussein could be contained. But chemical agents, lethal viruses, and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained. Imagine those 19 hijackers with other weapons and other plans, this time armed by Saddam Hussein. It would take one vial, one canister, one crate slipped into this country to bring a day of horror like none we have ever known. We will do everything in our power to make sure that that day never comes. 
Some have said we must not act until the threat is imminent. Since when have terrorists and tyrants announced their intentions, politely putting us on notice before they strike? If this threat is permitted to fully and suddenly emerge, all actions, all words, and all recriminations would come too late. Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not a strategy, and it is not an option. 
The dictator who is assembling the world's most dangerous weapons has already used them on whole villages, leaving thousands of his own citizens dead, blind, or disfigured. Iraqi refugees tell us how forced confessions are obtained, by torturing children while their parents are made to watch. International human rights groups have cataloged other methods used in the torture chambers of Iraq: electric shock, burning with hot irons, dripping acid on the skin, mutilation with electric drills, cutting out tongues, and rape. If this is not evil, then evil has no meaning. 
And tonight I have a message for the brave and oppressed people of Iraq: Your enemy is not surrounding your country; your enemy is ruling your country. And the day he and his regime are removed from power will be the day of your liberation. 
The world has waited 12 years for Iraq to disarm. America will notaccept a serious and mounting threat to our country and our friends and our allies. The United States will ask the U.N. Security Council to convene on February the 5th to consider the facts of Iraq's ongoing defiance of the world. Secretary of State Powell will present information and intelligence about Iraqi's legal—Iraq's illegal weapons programs, its attempt to hide those weapons from inspectors, and its links to terrorist groups. 
We will consult. But let there be no misunderstanding: If Saddam Hussein does not fully disarm, for the safety of our people and for the peace of the world, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. 
Sending Americans into battle is the most profound decision a President can make. The technologies of war have changed; the risks and suffering of war have not. For the brave Americans who bear the risk, no victory is free from sorrow. This Nation fights reluctantly, because we know the cost and we dread the days of mourning that always come. 
We seek peace. We strive for peace. And sometimes peace must be defended. A future lived at the mercy of terrible threats is no peace at all. If war is forced upon us, we willfight in a just cause and by just means, sparing, in every way we can, the innocent. And if war is forced upon us, we willfight with the full force and might of the United States military, and we will prevail. 
And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afghanistan, we will bring to the Iraqi people food and medicines and supplies and freedom. 

Remarks in Grand Rapids, Michigan
January 29, 2003
My point is, our presence in the world is more than just our might, but our might is needed in the world right now to make the world a more peaceful place. The war on terror is not confined strictly to the Al Qaida that we're chasing. The war on terror extends beyond just a shadowy terrorist network. The war on terror involves Saddam Hussein because of the nature of Saddam Hussein, the history of Saddam Hussein and his willingness to terrorize, himself. 
Saddam Hussein has terrorized his own people. He's terrorized his own neighborhood. He is a danger not only to countries in the region, but as I explained last night, because of Al Qaida connections, because of his history, he's a danger to the American people. And we've got to deal with him. We've got to deal with him before it is too late. 
Before September the 11th, during a period when a lot of us thought oceans would protect us forever from gathering threats far from our land, the thought of containing somebody like Saddam Hussein made sense—so we could step back in America and say, "Gosh. Well, don't worry. He's only a threat to somebody in the neighborhood, and we might pick or choose whether or not we're going to help in the neighborhood." But see, our fellow citizens must understand that September the 11th, 2001, changed the equation. It's changed the strategic outlook of this country, because we're not protected by oceans. The battlefield is here, and therefore, we must address threats today as they gather, before they become acute. 
There's a reason why the world asked Saddam Hussein to disarm—for 12 years. [Laughter] And the reason why is because he's dangerous. He's used them. He tortures his own people. He's gassed his own people. He's attacked people in the neighborhood. 
What's changed for America, besides the fact that he's still dangerous and can create havoc with friends in the neighborhood, is that there's now a shadowy terrorist network which he could use as a forward army, attacking his worst enemy and never leave a fingerprint behind, with deadly, deadly weapons. And that's what's changed. 
We're having an honest debate in this country, and we should, about peace and how to achieve the peace. It should be clear to you now, though, that in my judgment you don't contain Saddam Hussein. You don't hope that therapy will somehow change his evil mind—[laughter]—that you deal with Saddam Hussein. I hope we can do this peacefully. 
I went to the United Nations for a reason. One, I want the United Nations to be something other than an empty debating society. I wanted it to address this threat. By a 15-to-0 vote in the Security Council, they said, "Yes, it's a problem and he must disarm." But the fundamental question is, when? 
There's a lot of focus on the inspectors, and we wish them well. But the role of the inspectors is not to play hide-and-seek with Saddam Hussein in a country the size of California. There's 108 inspectors running around a country trying to stumble into something, 108 people who are being misled by a person who's made a history of fooling inspectors. See, the role of the inspectors are not to play "gotcha." He's better at playing "gotcha," obviously—for 12 years he's played "gotcha." The role of the inspectors are to watch Iraq disarm. That's the role of the inspectors. They're to report back and say, "Gosh, he's started getting rid of all his mustard gas or sarin gas. He started getting rid of these weapons of mass destruction. He's now getting rid of the biological laboratories." That's the role of the inspectors. 
And it's clear he's not disarming. I'm convinced that this still can be done peacefully. I certainly hope so. The idea of committing troops is my last option, not my first. I understand the terrible price of war. I understand what it means to put somebody into combat. I know what it means to hug mothers and wives. But I've got to tell you something. I've thought long and hard about this. The risks of doing nothing, the risk of assuming the best from Saddam Hussein, it's just not a risk worth taking. 
So I callupon the world to come together and insist that this dangerous man disarm. But should they choose not to continue to pressure Saddam and should he continue to defy the world, for the sake of our peace, for the sake of the security, this country will lead a coalition of other willing nations, and we will disarm Saddam Hussein. If need be, if war is brought upon us like I said last night, I want to assure you, particularly those who wear the uniform and those who have a loved one in the military, we will commit the full force and might of the United States military, and for the name of peace, we will prevail. 
And when we do, we will free people. This great, powerful Nation is motivated not by power for power's sake but because of our values. If everybody matters, if every life counts, then we should hope everybody has the great God's gift of freedom. We go into Iraq to disarm the country. We will also go in to make sure that those who are hungry are fed, those who need health care will have health care, those youngsters who need education will get education. But most of all, we will uphold our values. And the biggest value we hold dear is the value of freedom. As I said last night, freedom and liberty, they are not America's gifts to the world. They are God's gift to humanity. We hold that thought dear to our hearts. 
This is a great nation. America is a strong nation. America is a nation full of people who are compassionate. America is a nation that is willing to serve causes greater than ourselves. There's no question we face challenges ahead of us, challenges at home, challenges abroad. But as I said last night, history has called the right nation into action. History has called the United States into action, and we will not let history down. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and an Exchange With Reporters
January 30, 2003
President Bush. First, let me echo the comments of my National Security Adviser, who the other day in commenting about this process said this is a matter of weeks, not months. In other words, for the sake of peace, this issue must be resolved. Hopefully, it can be done peacefully. Hopefully, the pressure of the free world will convince Mr. Saddam Hussein to relinquish power. And should he choose to leave the country, along with a lot of the other henchmen who have tortured the Iraqi people, we would welcome that, of course. 
I will tell my friend Silvio that the use of military troops is my last choice, not my first. The commitment of young men and Americans into battle is a difficult decision, because I understand the cost of war. But I also understand the cost of inaction. There is a high price to be paid for the civilized world by not enforcing the opinion of the world, which was for Saddam Hussein to disarm. 
There's a reason why leaders around the world believe he ought to disarm. There's a reason why the Security Council of the United Nations voted 15 to nothing to say to Saddam, disarm—and that's because he's dangerous. 
President Bush. Along those lines, let me make one clarification on my statement. I think that no matter how Mr. Saddam is dealt with, the goal of disarming Iraq still stays the same, regardless of who is in charge of the Government. And that's very important for the Iraqi people to know. 
And I also want to assure Silvio that should we require military action, shortly after our troops go in will go food and medicine and supplies to the Iraqi people. We will, of course, win militarily, if we have to. But we'll also want to make sure that we win the peace as well. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom
January 31, 2003
President Bush. Well, all due in modesty, I thought I did a pretty good job myself of making it clear that he's not disarming and why he should disarm. Secretary Powell will make a strong case about the danger of an armed Saddam Hussein. He will make it clear that Saddam Hussein is fooling the world or trying to fool the world. He will make it clear that Saddam is a menace to peace in his own neighborhood. He will also talk about Al Qaida links, links that really do portend a danger for America and for Great Britain—anybody else who loves freedom. 
As the Prime Minister says, the war on terror is not confined to just a shadowy terrorist network. The war on terror includes people who are willing to train and to equip organizations such as Al Qaida. 
See, the strategic view of America changed after September the 11th. We must deal with threats before they hurt the American people again. And as I have said repeatedly, Saddam Hussein would like nothing more than to use a terrorist network to attack and to kill and leave no fingerprints behind. Colin Powell will continue making that case to the American people and the world at the United Nations. 
President Bush. I can't make that claim.
President Bush. Let's see if I can be polite. Saddam Hussein has had 12 years to learn how to deceive, and I would view this as more deception on his part. He expects to be able to convince 108 inspectors that he is openminded. The only way that he can show that he is truly a peaceful man is to notnegotiate with inspectors, is not to string the inspectors along, but to disarm in front of inspectors. We know what a disarmed regime looks like. We know what it means to disarm. There's nonegotiations. The idea of calling inspectors in to negotiate is a charade. If he is going to disarm, he must start disarming. That's the only thing he needs to talk to the inspectors about, is, "Here. I'm disarming."
President Bush. Actually, prior to September the 11th, we were discussing smart sanctions. We were trying to fashion a sanction regime that would make it more likely to be able to contain somebody like Saddam Hussein. After September the 11th, the doctrine of containment just doesn't hold any water, as far as I'm concerned. 
I've told you the strategic vision of our country shifted dramatically, and it shifted dramatically because we now recognize that oceans no longer protect us, that we're vulnerable to attack. And the worst form of attack could come from somebody acquiring weapons of mass destruction and using them on the American people, or the worst kind of attack could come when somebody uses weapons of mass destruction on our friends in Great Britain. 
Recently, Tony Blair's government routed out a poison plot. It should say to the people of Great Britain: There is a present danger—that weapons of mass destruction are a danger to people who love freedom. 

Remarks on Project BioShield in Bethesda, Maryland
February 3, 2003
And in Iraq, where a brutal regime is arming to threaten the world—the peace of the world, we have made our intentions very clear. If the dictator does not disarm, if he doesn't get rid of his weapons of mass destruction, then the United States will lead a coalition to disarm him. And we will do so in the name of peace, and we will do so for the security of the American people.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With King Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa of Bahrain
February 3, 2003
His Majesty hopes that we're able to— like me, hopes that we're able to resolve this issue peacefully in Iraq. But if Saddam Hussein does not disarm, for the sake of peace and security for not only the people in the region, for people here in America, we will go in and disarm him. And I have made that clear to His Majesty in prior conversations. He fully understands the position of the United States, and he has been incredibly supportive, for which I'm grateful.

Remarks on the Iraqi Regime's Noncompliance With United Nations Resolutions
February 6, 2003
The Secretary of State has now briefed the United Nations Security Council on Iraq's illegal weapons programs, its attempts to hide those weapons, and its links to terrorist groups. I want to thank Secretary Powell for his careful and powerful presentation of the facts. 
The information in the Secretary's briefing and other information in our possession was obtained through great skill and often at personal risk. Uncovering secret information in a totalitarian society is one of the most difficult intelligence challenges. Those who accept that challenge, both in our intelligence services and in those of our friends and allies, perform a great service to all free nations, and I'm grateful for their good work. 
The Iraqi regime's violations of Security Council resolutions are evident, and they continue to this hour. The regime has never accounted for a vast arsenal of deadly biological and chemical weapons. To the contrary, the regime is pursuing an elaborate campaign to conceal its weapons materiels and to hide or intimidate key experts and scientists, all in direct defiance of Security Council 1441. 
This deception is directed from the highest levels of the Iraqi regime, including Saddam Hussein, his son, the Vice President, and the very official responsible for cooperating with inspectors. In intercepted conversations, we have heard orders to conceal materiels from the U.N. inspectors. And we have seen through satellite images concealment activity at close to 30 sites, including movement of equipment before inspectors arrive. 
The Iraqi regime has actively and secretly attempted to obtain equipment needed to produce chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons. Firsthand witnesses have informed us that Iraq has at least seven mobile factories for the production of biological agents, equipment mounted on trucks and rails to evade discovery. Using these factories, Iraq could produce within just months hundreds of pounds of biological poisons. 
The Iraqi regime has acquired and tested the means to deliver weapons of mass destruction. All the world has now seen the footage of an Iraqi Mirage aircraft with a fuel tank modified to spray biological agents over wide areas. Iraq has developed spray devices that could be used on unmanned aerial vehicles with ranges far beyond what is permitted by the Security Council. A UAV launched from a vessel off the American coast could reach hundreds of miles inland. 
Iraq has never accounted for thousands of bombs and shells capable of delivering chemical weapons. The regime is actively pursuing components for prohibited ballistic missiles. And we have sources that tell us that Saddam Hussein recently authorized Iraqi field commanders to use chemical weapons, the very weapons the dictator tells the world he does not have. 
One of the greatest dangers we face is that weapons of mass destruction might be passed to terrorists, who would not hesitate to use those weapons. Saddam Hussein has longstanding, direct, and continuing ties to terrorist networks. Senior members of Iraqi intelligence and Al Qaida have met at least eight times since the early 1990s. Iraq has sent bomb-making and document forgery experts to work with Al Qaida. Iraq has also provided Al Qaida with chemical and biological weapons training. 
We also know that Iraq is harboring a terrorist network headed by a senior Al Qaida terrorist planner. The network runs a poison and explosive training center in northeast Iraq, and many of its leaders are known to be in Baghdad. The head of this network traveled to Baghdad for medical treatment and stayed for months. Nearly two dozen associates joined him there and have been operating in Baghdad for more than 8 months. 
The same terrorist network operating out of Iraq is responsible for the murder, the recent murder, of an American citizen, an American diplomat, Laurence Foley. The same network has plotted terrorism against France, Spain, Italy, Germany, the Republic of Georgia, and Russia, and was caught producing poisons in London. The danger Saddam Hussein poses reaches across the world. 
This is the situation as we find it. Twelve years after Saddam Hussein agreed to disarm and 90 days after the Security Council passed Resolution 1441 by a unanimous vote, Saddam Hussein was required to make a full declaration of his weapons programs. He has not done so. Saddam Hussein was required to fully cooperate in the disarmament of his regime. He has not done so. Saddam Hussein was given a final chance. He is throwing that chance away. 
The dictator of Iraq is making his choice. Now the nations of the Security Council must make their own. On November 8, by demanding the immediate disarmament of Iraq, the United Nations Security Council spoke with clarity and authority. Now the Security Council will show whether its words have any meaning. Having made its demands, the Security Council must not back down when those demands are defied and mocked by a dictator. 
The United States would welcome and support a new resolution which makes clear that the Security Council stands behind its previous demands. Yet resolutions mean little without resolve. And the United States, along with a growing coalition of nations, is resolved to take whateveractionisnecessary to defend ourselves and disarm the Iraqi regime. 
On September the 11th, 2001, the American people saw what terrorists could do by turning four airplanes into weapons. We will not wait to see what terrorists or terrorist states could do with chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear weapons. Saddam Hussein can now be expected to begin another round of empty concessions, transparently false denials. No doubt, he will play a last-minute game of deception. The game is over. 
All the world can rise to this moment. The community of free nations can show that it is strong and confident and determined to keep the peace. The United Nations can renew its purpose and be a source of stability and security in the world. The Security Council can affirm that it is able and prepared to meet future challenges and other dangers. And we can give the Iraqi people their chance to live in freedom and choose their own government. 
Saddam Hussein has made Iraq into a prison, a poison factory, and a torture chamber for patriots and dissidents. Saddam Hussein has the motive and the means and the recklessness and the hatred to threaten the American people. Saddam Hussein will be stopped. 

Remarks Prior to the Swearing-In Ceremony for John Snow as Secretary of the Treasury and an Exchange With Reporters
February 7, 2003
The President. The Security Council unanimously passed a resolution, called 1441, that said Saddam Hussein must completely disarm. Saddam Hussein has not disarmed. Colin Powell made that case very clear, and now the members of the Security Council can decide whether or not that resolution will have any force, whether it means anything. 
This is a defining moment for the U.N. Security Council. If the Security Council were to allow a dictator to lie and deceive, the Security Council would be weakened. I'm confident that when the members assess their responsibilities and the responsibilities of the U.N., that they will understand that 1441 must be upheld in the fullest. 
The President. That's up to Saddam Hussein. I mean, the record is poor, at best. The man has been told to disarm for 12 long years. He's ignored the demands of the free world. And then we passed another resolution, and for 90 days he's—the best way I can describe it is—played a game with the inspectors. So the U.N. Security Council has got to make up its mind soon as to whether or not its word means anything. 
And you know, I've never felt we needed a resolution; 1441 speaks very clearly. It talks about serious consequences if he doesn't disarm. However, I said yesterday that it would be helpful to have a resolution so long as it demands compliance with 1441, confirms the spirit of 1441. But Saddam Hussein is—he's treated the demands of the world as a joke up to now, and it was his choice to make. He's the person who gets to decide war and peace. 
The President. This is a guy who was asked to declare his weapons, said he didn't have any. This is a person who we have proven to the world is deceiving everybody. I mean, he's a master at it. He's a master of deception. As I said yesterday, he'll probably try it again. He'll probably try to lie his way out of compliance or deceive or put out some false statement. You know, if he wanted to disarm, he would have disarmed. We know what a disarmed regime looks like. 
I heard somebody say the other day, "Well, how about a beefed-up inspection regime?" Well, the role of inspectors is to sit there and verify whether or not he's disarmed, not to play hide-and-seek in a country the size of California. If Saddam Hussein was interested in peace and interested in complying with the U.N. Security Council resolutions, he would have disarmed. And yet, for 12 years, plus 90 days, he has tried to avoid disarmament by lying and deceiving. 
The President. I have said that if Saddam Hussein does not disarm, we will lead a coalition to disarm him. And I mean it. 

The President's Radio Address
February 8, 2003
Good morning. On Wednesday, Secretary of State Powell briefed the United Nations Security Council on Iraq's illegal weapons programs, its attempts to hide those weapons, and its links to terrorist groups. 
The Iraqi regime's violations of Security Council resolutions are evident. They are dangerous to America and the world, and they continue to this hour. 
The regime has never accounted for a vast arsenal of deadly biological and chemical weapons. To the contrary, the regime is pursuing an elaborate campaign to conceal its weapons materials and to hide or intimidate key experts and scientists. This effort of deception is directed from the highest levels of the Iraqi regime, including Saddam Hussein, his son, Iraq's Vice President, and the very official responsible for cooperating with inspectors. 
The Iraqi regime has actively and secretly attempted to obtain equipment needed to produce chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons. Firsthand witnesses have informed us that Iraq has at least seven mobile factories for the production of biological agents, equipment mounted on trucks and rails to evade discovery. 
The Iraqi regime has acquired and tested the means to deliver weapons of mass destruction. It has never accounted for thousands of bombs and shells capable of delivering chemical weapons. It is actively pursuing components for prohibited ballistic missiles. And we have sources that tell us that Saddam Hussein recently authorized Iraqi field commanders to use chemical weapons, the very weapons the dictator tells us he does not have. 
One of the greatest dangers we face is that weapons of mass destruction might be passed to terrorists who would not hesitate to use those weapons. Saddam Hussein has longstanding, direct, and continuing ties to terrorist networks. Senior members of Iraqi intelligence and Al Qaida have met at least 8 times since the early 1990s. Iraq has sent bombmaking and document forgery experts to work with Al Qaida. Iraq has also provided Al Qaida with chemical and biological weapons training. And an Al Qaida operative was sent to Iraq several times in the late 1990s for help in acquiring poisons and gases. 
We also know that Iraq is harboring a terrorist network headed by a senior Al Qaida terrorist planner. This network runs a poison and explosives training camp in northeast Iraq, and many of its leaders are known to be in Baghdad. 
This is the situation as we find it: 12 years after Saddam Hussein agreed to disarm and more than 90 days after the Security Council passed Resolution 1441 by a unanimous vote, Saddam Hussein was required to make a full declaration of his weapons programs. He has not done so. Saddam Hussein was required to fully cooperate in the disarmament of his regime. He has not done so. Saddam Hussein was given a final chance. He is throwing away that chance. 
Having made its demands, the Security Council must not back down when those demands are defied and mocked by a dictator. The United States would welcome and support a new resolution making clear that the Security Council stands behinds its previous demands. Yet, resolutions mean little without resolve, and the United States, along with a growing coalition of nations, will take whateveractionisnecessary to defend ourselves and disarm the Iraqi regime. 

Remarks at the "Congress of Tomorrow" Republican Retreat Reception in White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia
February 9, 2003
The issue facing our Nation and the world is the extension of the war on terror to places like Iraq. Prior to September the 11th, there was apparently no connection between a place like Iraq and terror. Oh, sure, he had run some terrorist networks out of his country, and that was of concern to us. But it was very difficult to link a terrorist network and Saddam Hussein to the American soil. As a matter of fact, it was very difficult to link any attack on the American soil, because prior to September the 11th, we were confident that two oceans could protect us from harm. 
The world changed on September the 11th. Obviously, it changed for thousands of people's lives for whom we still mourn. But it changed for America, and it's very important that the American people understand the change. We are now a battleground. We are vulnerable. Therefore, we cannot ignore gathering threats across the ocean. It used to be that we could pick or choose whether or not we would become involved. If we saw a threat, it may be a threat to a friend, in which case we would be involved, but never did we realize the threat could be directed at the American people. 
And that changed. And therefore, when we hear of stories about weapons of mass destruction in the hands of a brutal dictator who hates America, we need to take that seriously, and we are. And when we find out there's links between Baghdad and a killer who actually ordered the killing of one of our fellow citizens, we've got to realize the—what that means to our future. 
And that's why this administration and this country is holding the U.N. Security Council and the world to its demands that Saddam Hussein disarm. It is important for the country to realize that Saddam Hussein has fooled the world for 12 years, is used to fooling the world, is confident he can fool the world. He is—wants the world to think that hide-and-seek is a game that we should play. And it's over. 
You see, our country recognizes, and a lot of other countries now recognize as well, the role of the inspector is to show up and verify whether Saddam Hussein is disarming. That's the role of the inspector. The role of inspectors—there's 104 of them—the role of the inspector is not to go into a state the size of—a country the size of California and try to figure out where this guy has hid things over a 12-year period of time. 
And the inspectors have gone to Iraq, and it is clear that not only is Saddam Hussein deceiving, it is clear he's not disarming. And so you'll see us, over the next short period of time, working with friends and allies and the United Nations to bring that body along. And it's a moment of truth for the United Nations. The United Nations gets to decide shortly whether or not it is going to be relevant in terms of keeping the peace, whether or not its words mean anything. 
But one thing is certain: For the sake of peace and for the sake of security, the United States and our friends and allies, we will disarm Saddam Hussein if he will not disarm himself. 

Remarks at the National Religious Broadcasters Convention in Nashville, Tennessee
February 10, 2003
We face an outlaw regime in Iraq that hates our country, a regime that aids and harbors terrorists and is armed with weapons of mass murder. Before September the 11th, 2001, there's a lot of good folks who believed that Saddam Hussein could be contained. Before September the 11th, 2001, we thought oceans would protect us forever, that if we saw a gathering threat somewhere else in the world, we could respond to it if we chose—so chose to do so. But that all changed on that fateful day. 
Chemical agents, lethal viruses, and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained. Secretly, without fingerprints, Saddam Hussein could provide one of his hidden weapons to terrorists or help them develop their own. Saddam Hussein is a threat. He's a threat to the United States of America. He's a threat to some of our closest friends and allies. We don't accept this threat. 
As a matter of fact, the world saw this as a threat 12 years ago. Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein was told to disarm for a reason: He's a dangerous man. And he hasn't disarmed. We've tried economic sanctions. He hasn't changed. Over the years, we've tried limited strikes against military facilities. It didn't work. We've offered Iraq the path of voluntary disarmament and inspections. The Iraqi regime is rejecting it. 
Saddam Hussein has broken every promise to disarm. He has shown complete contempt for the international community. Last fall the international community spoke with united voice. It said, "This is your last chance, Mr. Saddam Hussein, to do what you said you would do, which is, in the name of peace, disarm. Destroy your weapons of mass destruction." The role of the inspectors is not to play hide-and-seek, in a country the size of California, with 104 people. The role of inspectors is to verify whether or not Mr. Saddam Hussein is keeping his word, whether or not he's showing up with his weapons and destroying them—the weapons, by the way, he says he doesn't have. 
My attitude is that we owe it to future generations of Americans and citizens in freedom-loving countries to see to it that Mr. Saddam Hussein is disarmed. It's his choice to make as to how he will be disarmed. He can either do so—which it doesn't look like he's going to. For the sake of peace, we will lead a coalition of willing countries and disarm Saddam Hussein. 
If war is forced upon us—and I say "forced upon us" because use of the military is not my first choice. I hug the mothers and the widows of those who may have lost their life in the name of peace and freedom. I take my responsibilities incredibly seriously about the commitment of troops. But should we need to use troops, for the sake of future generations of Americans, American troops will act in the honorable traditions of our military and in the highest moral traditions of our country. 
We will try in every way we can to spare innocent life. The people of Iraq are not our enemies. The true enemy of the Iraqi people, Saddam Hussein, has a different strategy. In violation of the Geneva Conventions, Saddam Hussein is positioning his military forces within civilian populations in order to shield his military and blame coalition forces for civilian casualties that he has caused. Saddam Hussein regards the Iraqi people as human shields, entirely expendable when their suffering serves his purposes. 
America views the Iraqi people as human beings who have suffered long enough under this tyrant. And the Iraqi people can be certain of this: The United States is committed to helping them build a better future. If conflict occurs, we'll bring Iraq food and medicine and supplies and, most importantly, freedom. As I said in my State of the Union, liberty is not America's gift to the world. Liberty is God's gift to every human being in the world.

Remarks Following Discussions With Prime Minister John Howard of Australia and an Exchange With Reporters
February 10, 2003
President Bush. Iraq needs to disarm. And the reason why we even need to fly U-2 flights is because they're not disarming. We know what a disarmed country looks like, and Iraq doesn't look like that. This is a man who is trying to stall for time, trying to play a diplomatic game. He's been successful at it for 12 years. But no, the question is, will he disarm? 
I notice somebody said the other day, "Well, we need more inspectors." Well, a disarmed—a country which is disarming really needs one or two inspectors to verify the fact that they're disarming. We're not playing hide-and-seek. That's what he wants to continue to play. And so, you know, Saddam's got to disarm. If he doesn't, we'll disarm him. 
In our country it used to be that oceans could protect us. At least we thought so. There was wars on other continents, but we were safe. And so we could decide whether or not we addressed the threat on our own time. If there was a threat gathering from afar, we could say, "Well, let's see; it may be in our interest to get involved, or it may not be." We had the luxury. September the 11th, that changed. America is now a battleground in the war on terror. 
Secondly, the Secretary of State made it very clear that there are connections between Saddam Hussein and terrorist networks. And therefore, it is incumbent upon all of us who love freedom to understand the new world in which we live. John Howard understands that. 
President Bush. My personal message is that I want to keep the peace and make the world more peaceful. I understand why people don't like to commit the military to action. I can understand that. I'm the person in this country that hugs the mothers and the widows if their son or husband dies. I know people would like to avoid armed conflict, and so would I. But the risks of doing nothing far outweigh the risks of whateverittakes to disarm Saddam Hussein. 
I've thought long and hard about this issue. My job is to protect the American people from further harm. I believe that Saddam Hussein is a threat to the American people. I also know he's a threat to our friends and allies. 
The second thing—my message is, and I started speaking about this today, I also have got great compassion and concern for the Iraqi people. These are people who have been tortured and brutalized, people who have been raped because they may disagree with Saddam Hussein. He's a brutal dictator. In this country and in Australia, people believe that everybody has got worth, everybody counts, that everybody is equal in the eyes of the Almighty. So the issue is not only peace, the issue is freedom and liberty. 

Remarks at Naval Station Mayport in Jacksonville
February 13, 2003
The civilized world has awakened to the growing danger posed by the Iraqi regime. Twelve years ago, Saddam Hussein agreed to disarm as a condition of suspending the Gulf war. Three months ago, the United Nations Security Council gave him a final chance to meet that obligation. Saddam Hussein is not disarming. He's deceiving. 
America has laid out the facts for the world to see. Saddam Hussein has chemical weapons programs and the means to use them. Saddam Hussein has biological weapons program and the means to deliver those weapons. He has secretly attempted to obtain materials needed to produce nuclear weapons. Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists, including members of Al Qaida. He harbors a senior Al Qaida leader who ordered the assassination of an American diplomat, the same man who plotted against Spain and Italy and the Republic of Georgia and Russia and Great Britain and France and Germany. The Iraqi regime is engaged in a massive campaign to conceal its weapons of mass destruction and its ties to terrorists, and that deception continues today. 
At any moment during the last 97 days— and during the last 12 years—Saddam Hussein could have completely and immediately disarmed himself. Instead, he's used all this time to build and to hide weapons. He must be hoping that by stalling he'll buy himself another 12 years. He's wrong. This country will notaccept a serious and mounting threat to our Nation, our people, and our friends and allies. 
Military force is always this Nation's last option. Yet if force becomes necessary to disarm Iraq and enforce the will of the United Nations, if force becomes necessary to secure our country and to keep the peace, America will act deliberately; America will act decisively; and America will act victoriously with the world's greatest military. 
America will also be acting with friends and allies. An overwhelming majority of NATO members oppose the threat of Iraq and understand that tough choices may be necessary to keep the peace. Many nations have offered to provide forces or other support to disarm the Iraqi regime. Every nation of the Gulf Cooperation Council has agreed to help defend and protect Kuwait. And now the world's most important multilateral body faces a decision. 
If there is a conflict, American forces will act in the honorable traditions of our military and in the highest moral traditions of this country. Our military will be fighting the oppressors of Iraq, not the people of Iraq. America's military fights not to conquer but to liberate. 
In case of conflict, this great Nation is already putting plans and supplies into place so that food and other humanitarian relief will flow quickly to the Iraqi people. You see, we seek more than the defeat of terror; we seek an advance of freedom and a world at peace. That is the charge that history has given us, and that is a charge we will keep. 

Remarks on Improving Counterterrorism Intelligence
February 14, 2003
This war requires us to understand that terror is broader than one international network, that these terrorist networks have got connections, in some cases, to countries run by outlaw dictators. And that's the issue with Iraq. When I speak about the war on terror, I not only talk about Al Qaida. I talk about Iraq, because, after all, Saddam Hussein has got weapons of mass destruction, and he's used them. Saddam Hussein is used to deceiving the world, and he continues to do so. Saddam Hussein has got ties to terrorist networks. Saddam Hussein is a danger, and that's why he will be disarmed—one way or the other.
We've got fabulous men and women in uniform who are on the hunt. The finest, bravest soldiers ever known to mankind are helping us track them down, one by one. And if we have to send them into Iraq to make sure that that regime is disarmed, we'll use every ounce of our ingenuity and technology to protect innocent life of the Iraqi people, at the same time achieve an objective of achieving world peace. 
As I said in my State of the Union, liberty is not America's gift to the world; it is God's gift to each and every human being. So as we pursue peace, we also pursue liberty. We care about those who suffer under the hands of a dictator in Iraq. We care deeply about those who dissent and then are tortured, about those who express an opinion other than what the dictator thinks and are raped and mutilated. The condition of the Iraqi citizen is on our mind and in our hearts. As we work to secure the peace, we'll always hold those values of freedom dear to our heart. 

Remarks at the Swearing-In Ceremony for William Donaldson as Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission and an Exchange With Reporters
February 18, 2003
Secondly, evidently some of the world don't view Saddam Hussein as a risk to peace. I respectfully disagree. Saddam Hussein has gassed his own people. Saddam Hussein has got weapons of mass destruction. Saddam Hussein has made—has defied the United Nations. Saddam Hussein is providing links to terrorists. Saddam Hussein is a threat to America, and we will deal with him. 
You know, I—war is my last choice. But the risk of doing nothing is even a worst option, as far as I'm concerned. I owe it to the American people to secure this country. I will do so. 
The President. Hopefully, Saddam Hussein will disarm. 
The President. If he chooses not to disarm, as I have been saying for a long time, Ron, we'll lead a coalition of the willing to disarm him. 
The President. We're working with our friends. As I said, a second resolution would be useful. We don't need a second resolution. It's clear this guy could even care less about the first resolution. He's in total defiance of 1441. But we want to work with our friends and allies to see if we can get a second resolution. That's what we're doing right now. 
The President. Well, first of all, as you know, NATO did express their desire to help Turkey, and I appreciate the NATO Allies. I also appreciate the EU statement yesterday that Saddam Hussein needs to fully disarm. I thought those were positive developments. We're working closely with the Turks. And you know, we've got great respect for the Turkish Government. They've got—had no better friend than the American Government. And hopefully we can come up with an agreement that's satisfactory to both parties. We're still working it. 
The President. Well, you mean another, another, another last chance? Well, he knows my feelings, and that is he needs to disarm—completely, totally disarm. Listen, he's a fellow that likes to buy time through deception and delay. He believes time is on his side. After all, he was quoted in an Egyptian newspaper as saying all he's got to do is stall and defy the world, and, you know, coalitions will fall apart. 
I am determined to keep the peace. I'm determined to hold this man to account. And there's two reasons why: One, we have the obligation, I have the obligation, this administration has the obligation to do everything we can to protect the American people; secondly, I think it's very important for the United Nations to be useful as we go out into the future. And there's nothing less useful than issuing a resolution and then not upholding the resolution. And, after all, I want to remind the people that this man has been in defiance of resolution after resolution after resolution after resolution for 12 long years. And I think unless the United Nations shows some backbone and courage, it will render the—it could render the Security Council irrelevant. And that's a danger, in dealing with the new threats that the civilized world faces. 
First of all, you know, size of protest, it's like deciding, well, I'm going to decide policy based upon a focus group. The role of a leader is to decide policy based upon the security—in this case, the security of the people. Tony Blair understands that Saddam Hussein is a risk. Tony Blair sees that, you know, a weakened United Nations is not good for world peace. And he is a courageous leader, and I'm proud to call him friend. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Secretary General Lord Robertson of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
February 19, 2003
George, welcome. I'm honored to have you here. You represent our Nation's most important Alliance, NATO. Today, this Alliance is providing equipment to Turkey to help protect our Turkish ally from a potential attack from Iraq.

Remarks in Kennesaw, Georgia
February 20, 2003
That changed on September the 11th, 2001, because the stark reality of 2001 is that America is now a battlefield, that the war has come home. And therefore, this Nation must also confront not only shadowy terrorist networks but the gravest danger in the war on terror: outlaw regimes arming to threaten the peace with weapons of mass destruction. 
After Secretary of State Powell's presentation to the United Nations Security Council, the world knows that Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction, even though he said he didn't, and that he is not complying with the United Nations demands to destroy them. He is actively deceiving the inspectors. He is actively hiding the weapons. And so the Security Council, earlier on, gave Saddam Hussein one final chance to disarm, and he's throwing that chance away. 
If military force becomes necessary to disarm Iraq, this Nation, joined by others, will act decisively in a just cause, and we will prevail. 
Military action is this Nation's last option. And let me tell you what's not an option. Trusting in the sanity and restraint of Saddam Hussein is not an option; denial and endless delay in the face of growing danger is not an option; leaving the lives and the security of the American people at the mercy of this dictator and his weapons of mass destruction, not an option. 
America and our allies are called once again to defend the peace against an aggressive tyrant, and we accept this responsibility. 
We defend the security of our country, but our cause is broader. If war is forced upon us, we will liberate the people of Iraq from a cruel and violent dictator. The Iraqi people today are not treated with dignity, but they have the right to live in dignity. The Iraqi people today are notallowed to speak out for freedom, but they have a right to live in freedom. We don't believe freedom and liberty are America's gift to the world; we believe they are the Almighty's gift to mankind. And for the oppressed people of Iraq, people whose lives we care about, the day of freedom is drawing near. 
A free Iraq can be a source of hope for all the Middle East. Instead of threatening its neighbors and harboring terrorists, Iraq can be an example of progress and prosperity in a region that needs both. If we liberate the Iraqi people, they can rest assure that we will help them build a country that is disarmed and peaceful and united and free. 
The disarmament of Iraq will also demonstrate that free nations have the will and resolve to defend the peace. By defeating this threat, we will show other dictators that the path of aggression will lead to their own ruin. By defeating the threat of Iraq, we will show the world—we will show that the world is able and prepared to meet future dangers wherever they arise. 
Our goal is peace, and achieving peace requires resolve and action by free nations. In a more peaceful world, the American people will not live in fear, and the Iraqi people will not live in oppression. 

The President's News Conference With President Jose Maria Aznar of Spain in Crawford, Texas
February 22, 2003
President Aznar and I agree that the future of peace depends on the disarmament of Iraq. We agree that Saddam Hussein continues to be in violation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1441. We agree that the terms of that resolution must be fully respected. By Resolution 1441, the Security Council has taken a clear stand, and it now faces a clear choice. With all the world watching, the Council will now show whether it means what it says. 
Early next week, working with our friends and allies, we will introduce an additional Security Council resolution that will set out in clear and simple terms that Iraq is not complying with Resolution 1441. For the record, this would not be a second resolution on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction; it would only be the latest in a long series of resolutions going back 12 years. 
We will discuss this resolution with members of the Security Council, and we will hear again from Chief Inspector Blix. During these final deliberations, there is but one question for the Council to address: Is Saddam Hussein complying with Resolution 1441? That resolution did not ask for hints of progress or minor concessions. It demanded full and immediate disarmament. That and that alone is the issue before the Council. We will notallow the Iraqi dictator, with a history of aggression and close ties to terrorist groups, to continue to possess or produce weapons of mass destruction. 
This discussion sounds vaguely familiar. I think I remember getting asked the same questions prior to the last resolution, the Resolution 1441 that passed 15 to 0, where the Security Council said with a unanimous voice, Saddam must disarm. He hasn't disarmed. And so the clarity of vision that took place 4 months ago I'm confident will be in place after the Security Council takes a good look at the facts. And so we're just beginning, is my point.
President Bush. Yes. Si. Last chance. 
President Bush. No. As the President said, time is short. Tiempo es corte. And this is a chance for the Security Council to show its relevance. And I believe the Security Council will show its relevance, because Saddam Hussein has not disarmed. 
President Bush. We're in the process of discussing the language. If Iraq decides to destroy the weapons that were long-range weapons, that's just the tip of the iceberg. My question is, why don't they destroy every weapon—illegal weapon? 
Saddam Hussein wants time. And after all, he thinks he will get time, because he has done so—he has deceived the world for 12 years. He'll play like he's going to disarm. He has no intention of disarming. Otherwise, he would have done so. He'll say words that encourage—that sound encouraging. He's done so for 12 years. And so the idea of destroying a rocket or two rockets or however many he's going to destroy says to me that he's got a lot more weapons to destroy, and why hasn't he destroyed them yet? 
In terms of language, that's exactly why we've—that's exactly why Jose Maria and I are talking. And we'll let you know what's in the resolution when we put it down. 

Remarks to the National Governors Association Conference
February 24, 2003
The war on terror is more than just chasing down shadowy terrorist networks. The war on terror is recognizing that weapons of mass destruction in the hands of brutal dictators also threatens the American people. I've come to the conclusion that the risk of doing nothing far exceeds the risk of working with the world to disarm Saddam Hussein. I came to that conclusion because of the new realities we all face as American citizens who love freedom and who aren't going to change. 
Today we're going to submit a resolution to the U.N. Security Council that spells out what the world has witnessed the last months. The Iraqi regime is not disarming. The Iraqi regime is not disarming as required by last fall's unanimous vote of the Security Council. Saddam Hussein's refusal to comply with the demands of the civilized world is a threat to peace, and it's a threat to stability. It's a threat to the security of our country. It's a threat to the security of peace-loving people everywhere. 
We're going to work with the members of the Security Council in the days ahead to make it clear to Saddam that the demands of the world and the United Nations will be enforced. It's an interesting moment for the Security Council and the United Nations. It's a moment to determine for this body, that we hope succeeds, to determine whether or not it is going to be relevant as the world confronts the threats to the 21st century. Is it going to be a body that means what it says? We certainly hope it does. 
But one way or the other, Saddam Hussein, for the sake of peace and for the security of the American people, will be disarmed. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With the National Economic Council and an Exchange With Reporters
February 25, 2003
The President. Full disarmament. 
The President. Well, there's only one thing. There's full disarmament. The man has been told to disarm. For the sake of peace, he must completely disarm. I suspect we'll see him playing games, that he will—the world will say disarm, and he will all of a sudden find a weapon that he claimed he didn't have. 
The President. I suspect that he will try to fool the world one more time. After all, he has had a history of doing that for 12 years. He's been successful at gaming the system, and our attitude is, it's now time for him to fully disarm. And we expect the Security Council to honor its word by insisting that Saddam disarm. Now is the time. 
The President. David, there is all kinds of estimates about the cost of war. But the risk of doing nothing, the risk of the security of this country being jeopardized at the hands of a madman with weapons of mass destruction, far exceeds the risks of any action we may be forced to take. 
There are people who worry about the future. I understand that, and I worry about the future. I worry about a future in which Saddam Hussein gets to blackmail and/or attack. I worry about a future in which terrorist organizations are fueled and funded by a Saddam Hussein. And that's why we're bringing this issue to a head. 
The President. Obviously, we'd like to have a positive vote. That's why we've submitted a Security Council resolution, along with Great Britain and Spain. But as I said all along, it would be helpful and useful, but I don't believe we need a second resolution. Saddam Hussein hasn't disarmed. He may play like he's going to disarm, but he hasn't disarmed. And for the sake of peace and the security of the American people, he must disarm. 
The President. Well, any time you put a troop into harm's way, that in itself is a sacrifice. First of all—and that's why war is my last choice. That's why I've said all along I would hope that the world would come together to convince Saddam to make the decision to disarm. 
Perhaps the biggest risk in the theater, if we were to commit our troops, is Saddam himself. He shows no regard for human life in his own country. After all, he's gassed them; he's used the weapons of mass destruction on his own people that he now claims he doesn't have. He tortures people. He brutalizes them. He could care less about human condition inside of Iraq. 
And so I think one of the biggest dangers we face, if we go to war, is how he treats innocent life. And it is important for Iraqi leadership and Iraqi generals to clearly understand that if they take innocent life, if they destroy infrastructure, they will be held to account as war criminals.

Remarks at the American Enterprise Institute Dinner
February 26, 2003
In Iraq, a dictator is building and hiding weapons that could enable him to dominate the Middle East and intimidate the civilized world, and we will notallow it. This same tyrant has close ties to terrorist organizations and could supply them with the terrible means to strike this country, and America will notpermit it. The danger posed by Saddam Hussein and his weapons cannot be ignored or wished away. The danger must be confronted. We hope that the Iraqi regime will meet the demands of the United Nations and disarm, fully and peacefully. If it does not, we are prepared to disarm Iraq by force. Either way, this danger will be removed. 
The safety of the American people depends on ending this direct and growing threat. Acting against the danger will also contribute greatly to the long-term safety and stability of our world. The current Iraqi regime has shown the power of tyranny to spread discord and violence in the Middle East. A liberated Iraq can show the power of freedom to transform that vital region, by bringing hope and progress into the lives of millions. America's interests in security and America's belief in liberty both lead in the same direction, to a free and peaceful Iraq. 
The first to benefit from a free Iraq would be the Iraqi people themselves. Today they live in scarcity and fear under a dictator who has brought them nothing but war and misery and torture. Their lives and their freedom matter little to Saddam Hussein, but Iraqi lives and freedom matter greatly to us. 
Bringing stability and unity to a free Iraq will not be easy. Yet that is no excuse to leave the Iraqi regime's torture chambers and poison labs in operation. Any future the Iraqi people choose for themselves will be better than the nightmare world that Saddam Hussein has chosen for them. 
If we must use force, the United States and our coalition stand ready to help the citizens of a liberated Iraq. We will deliver medicine to the sick, and we are now moving into place nearly 3 million emergency rations to feed the hungry. We'll make sure that Iraq's 55,000 food distribution sites, operating under the oil-for-food program, are stocked and open as soon as possible. The United States and Great Britain are providing tens of millions of dollars to the U.N. High Commission on Refugees and to such groups as the World Food Program and UNICEF to provide emergency aid to the Iraqi people. 
We will also lead in carrying out the urgent and dangerous work of destroying chemical and biological weapons. We will provide security against those who try to spread chaos or settle scores or threaten the territorial integrity of Iraq. We will seek to protect Iraq's natural resources from sabotage by a dying regime and ensure those resources are used for the benefit of the owners, the Iraqi people. 
The United States has no intention of determining the precise form of Iraq's new Government. That choice belongs to the Iraqi people. Yet, we will ensure that one brutal dictator is not replaced by another. All Iraqis must have a voice in the new Government, and all citizens must have their rights protected. 
Rebuilding Iraq will require a sustained commitment from many nations, including our own. We will remain in Iraq as long as necessary and not a day more. America has made and kept this kind of commitment before, in the peace that followed a World War. After defeating enemies, we did not leave behind occupying armies; we left constitutions and parliaments. We established an atmosphere of safety, in which responsible, reform-minded local leaders could build lasting institutions of freedom. In societies that once bred fascism and militarism, liberty found a permanent home. 
There was a time when many said that the cultures of Japan and Germany were incapable of sustaining democratic values. Well, they were wrong. Some say the same of Iraq today. They are mistaken. The nation of Iraq, with its proud heritage, abundant resources, and skilled and educated people, is fully capable of moving toward democracy and living in freedom. 
The world has a clear interest in the spread of democratic values, because stable and free nations do not breed the ideologies of murder. They encourage the peaceful pursuit of a better life. And there are hopeful signs of a desire for freedom in the Middle East. Arab intellectuals have called on Arab governments to address the "freedom gap" so their peoples can fully share in the progress of our times. Leaders in the region speak of a new Arab charter that champions internal reform, greater political participation, economic openness, and free trade. And from Morocco to Bahrain and beyond, nations are taking genuine steps toward political reform. A new regime in Iraq would serve as a dramatic and inspiring example of freedom for other nations in the region. 
Success in Iraq could also begin a new stage for Middle Eastern peace and set in motion progress towards a truly democratic Palestinian state. The passing of Saddam Hussein's regime will deprive terrorist networks of a wealthy patron that pays for terrorist training and offers rewards to families of suicide bombers. And other regimes will be given a clear warning that support for terror will not be tolerated.
The United States and other nations are working on a roadmap for peace. We are setting out the necessary conditions for progress toward the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. It is the commitment of our Government and my personal commitment to implement the roadmap and to reach that goal. Old patterns of conflict in the Middle East can be broken, if all concerned will let go of bitterness and hatred and violence and get on with the serious work of economic development and political reform and reconciliation. America will seize every opportunity in pursuit of peace. And the end of the present regime in Iraq would create such an opportunity. 
In confronting Iraq, the United States is also showing ourcommitment to effective international institutions. We are a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. We helped to create the Security Council. We believe in the Security Council so much that we want its words to have meaning. 
Another resolution is now before the Security Council. If the Council responds to Iraq's defiance with more excuses and delays, if all its authority proves to be empty, the United Nations will be severely weakened as a source of stability and order. If the members rise to this moment, then the Council will fulfill its founding purpose. 
I've listened carefully as people and leaders around the world have made known their desire for peace. All of us want peace. The threat to peace does not come from those who seek to enforce the just demands of the civilized world. The threat to peace comes from those who flout those demands. If we have to act, we will act to restrain the violent and defend the cause of peace. And by acting, we will signal to outlaw regimes that in this new century, the boundaries of civilized behavior will be respected. 
Protecting those boundaries carries a cost. If war is forced upon us by Iraq's refusal to disarm, we will meet an enemy who hides his military forces behind civilians, who has terrible weapons, who is capable of any crime. The dangers are real, as our soldiers and sailors, airmen and marines fully understand. Yet, no military has ever been better prepared to meet these challenges. 

Remarks to the Latino Coalition
February 26, 2003
There's also a threat gathering in Iraq. It's been gathering for a long period of time. The danger with Iraq is that he can strike in the neighborhood. And the danger with Iraq is that he has got the willingness and capacity to train Al Qaida-type organizations and provide them with equipment to hurt America. 
The world has waited a long time for Mr. Saddam Hussein to disarm. They've waited a long time. He is a master of disguise and delay. He'll say, "Oh, I'm disarming," after he said he has no arms. 
We will continue to work with our friends, people who understand the value of freedom. We will insist that the United Nation Resolution 1441 be adhered to in its fullest. After all, we want the United Nations to be a legitimate, effective body. But for the safety of the American people and for peace in the world, Saddam Hussein will be disarmed one way or the other. And this Nation does so for the sake of peace. 
The use of our military is the absolute last option. It is the last alternative for the President. But the risk of doing nothing, the risk of assuming that Saddam Hussein will change, the risk of thinking and hoping for the best for the American people, far outweighs the risk of committing troops if we have to. The choice is Saddam Hussein's to make. It's been his to make all along. He gets to choose between peace and war. 
And the other thing that is an inherent part of our view of Iraq is how I started the discussion here. See, we believe everybody matters; everybody counts. It doesn't matter your background, where you're from; everybody has worth. As I said in my State of the Union Address, liberty is not America's gift to the world; liberty is God's gift to human—to the human—mankind. And that's what we believe. 

Remarks Following Discussions With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and an Exchange With Reporters
February 27, 2003
President Bush. The mission in early 1990s was to liberate Kuwait, and the United States achieved that mission. The mission now is to disarm Saddam Hussein, in the name of peace. And we will disarm Saddam Hussein. 
I noticed today there is some talk about the illegal rockets in Iraq. He—this is part of his—the discussion about these rockets is part of his campaign of deception. See, he'll say, "I'm not going to destroy the rockets," and then he'll have a change of mind this weekend and destroy the rockets and say, "I've disarmed." The rockets are just the tip of the iceberg. The only question at hand is total, complete disarmament, which he is refusing to do. 
President Bush. The mission—just remember what the mission was. When you commit troops to war, you must have a clear mission. Should we be forced to commit our troops because of his failure to disarm, the mission will be complete disarmament, which will mean regime change. That was not the mission in 1991. 

The President's Radio Address
March 1, 2003
Good morning. America is determined to enforce the demands of the United Nations Security Council by confronting the grave and growing danger of Saddam Hussein and his weapons of mass destruction. This dictator will notbeallowed to intimidate and blackmail the civilized world or to supply his terrible weapons to terrorist groups who would not hesitate to use them against us. The safety of the American people depends on ending this threat. 
But America's cause is always larger than America's security. We also stand for the advance of freedom and opportunity and hope. The lives and freedom of the Iraqi people matter little to Saddam Hussein, but they matter greatly to us. 
Saddam Hussein has a long history of brutal crimes, especially in time of war— even against his own citizens. If conflict comes, he could target civilians or place them inside military facilities. He could encourage ethnic violence. He could destroy natural resources, or worst of all, he could use his weapons of mass destruction. 
In order to minimize the suffering of Iraq's people, the United States and our coalition partners stand ready to provide vital help. We will deliver medicine to the sick and make sure that Iraq's 55,000 food distribution sites, operating with supplies from the oil-for-food program, are stocked and open as soon a possible. We are stockpiling relief supplies, such as blankets and water containers, for 1 million people. We are moving into place nearly 3 million emergency rations to feed the hungry. The United States and Great Britain are providing tens of millions of dollars to the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and to such groups as the World Food Program and UNICEF, so they will be ready to provide emergency aid to the Iraqi people. 
We will also lead in carrying out the urgent and dangerous work of destroying chemical and biological weapons. We will provide security against those who try to spread chaos or settle scores or threaten the territorial integrity of Iraq. And we will seek to protect Iraq's natural resources from sabotage by a dying regime and ensure they are used for the benefit of Iraq's own people. 
The United States has no intention of determining the precise form of Iraq's new Government. That choice belongs to the Iraqi people. Yet we will ensure that one brutal dictator is not replaced by another. All Iraqis must have a voice in the new Government, and all citizens must have their rights protected. 
Rebuilding Iraq will require a sustained commitment from many nations, including our own. We will remain in Iraq as long as necessary and not a day more. America has made and kept this kind of commitment before, in the peace that followed World War II. After defeating enemies, we did not leave behind occupying armies; we left constitutions and parliaments. We did not leave behind permanent foes; we found new friends and allies. 
There was a time when many said that the cultures of Japan and Germany were incapable of sustaining democratic values. They were wrong. Some say the same of Iraq today. They too are mistaken. The nation of Iraq, with its proud heritage, abundant resources, and skilled and educated people, is fully capable of moving toward democracy and living in freedom. 
It will be difficult to help freedom take hold in a country that has known three decades of dictatorship, secret police, internal divisions, and war. Yet the security of our Nation and the hopes of millions depends on us, and Americans do not turn away from duties because they are hard. We have met great tests in other times, and we will meet the tests of our time. 

Remarks to the American Medical Association National Conference
March 4, 2003
We're dealing with Iraq because the dictator of Iraq has got weapons of mass destruction. He's used weapons of mass destruction on his own people. He can't stand America. He can't stand our friends. He can't stand our allies. He's got connections to terrorist networks. The first war of the 21st century requires the United States to work with international bodies to deal with these threats, and we will continue to do so. 
I went to the United Nations to remind them that that body has a responsibility to make sure its words means something. I reminded them that for 12 long years the United Nations has asked Saddam to disarm because he's dangerous. We went and got another resolution almost 4 months ago, unanimously approved by the Security Council, which said clearly, "Saddam, you must disarm." 
The choice is Saddam Hussein's to make. It is his choice to determine whether there's war or peace. It is his choice to decide whether to listen to the demands of the free world. But no matter what his choice may be, for the sake of peace, for the sake of freedom, for the sake of security of our people, Saddam Hussein will be disarmed. 

The President's News Conference
March 6, 2003
Second, we have arrived at an important moment in confronting the threat posed to our Nation and to peace by Saddam Hussein and his weapons of terror. In New York tomorrow, the United Nations Security Council will receive an update from the chief weapons inspector. The world needs him to answer a single question: Has the Iraqi regime fully and unconditionally disarmed, as required by Resolution 1441, or has it not? 
Iraq's dictator has made a public show of producing and destroying a few missiles—missiles that violate the restrictions set out more than 10 years ago. Yet our intelligence shows that, even as he is destroying these few missiles, he has ordered the continued production of the very same type of missiles. 
Iraqi operatives continue to hide biological and chemical agents to avoid detection by inspectors. In some cases, these materials have been moved to different locations every 12 to 24 hours or placed in vehicles that are in residential neighborhoods. 
We know from multiple intelligence sources that Iraqi weapons scientists continue to be threatened with harm should they cooperate with U.N. inspectors. Scientists are required by Iraqi intelligence to wear concealed recording devices during interviews, and hotels where interviews take place are bugged by the regime. 
These are not the actions of a regime that is disarming. These are the actions of a regime engaged in a willful charade. These are the actions of a regime that systematically and deliberately is defying the world. If the Iraqi regime were disarming, we would know it because we would see it. Iraq's weapons would be presented to inspectors, and the world would witness their destruction. Instead, with the world demanding disarmament and more than 200,000 troops positioned near his country, Saddam Hussein's response is to produce a few weapons for show, while he hides the rest and builds even more. 
Inspection teams do not need more time or more personnel. All they need is what they have never received, the full cooperation of the Iraqi regime. Token gestures are notacceptable. The only acceptable outcome is the one already defined by a unanimous vote of the Security Council— total disarmament. 
Great Britain, Spain, and the United States have introduced a new resolution stating that Iraq has failed to meet the requirements of Resolution 1441. Saddam Hussein is not disarming. This is a fact. It cannot be denied. 
Saddam Hussein has a long history of reckless aggression and terrible crimes. He possesses weapons of terror. He provides funding and training and safe haven to terrorists—terrorists who would willingly use weapons of mass destruction against America and other peace-loving countries. Saddam Hussein and his weapons are a direct threat to this country, to our people, and to all free people. 
If the world fails to confront the threat posed by the Iraqi regime, refusing to use force even as a last resort, free nations would assume immense and unacceptable risks. The attacks of September the 11th, 2001, showed what the enemies of America did with four airplanes. We will not wait to see what terrorists or terrorist states could do with weapons of mass destruction. 
We are determined to confront threats wherever they arise. I will not leave the American people at the mercy of the Iraqi dictator and his weapons. 
In the event of conflict, America also accepts our responsibility to protect innocent lives in every way possible. We'll bring food and medicine to the Iraqi people. We'll help that nation to build a just government, after decades of brutal dictatorship. The form and leadership of that government is for the Iraqi people to choose. Anything they choose will be better than the misery and torture and murder they have known under Saddam Hussein. 
The President. Well, we're still in the final stages of diplomacy. I'm spending a lot of time on the phone, talking to fellow leaders about the need for the United Nations Security Council to state the facts, which is Saddam Hussein hasn't disarmed. Fourteen forty-one, the Security Council resolution passed unanimously last fall, said clearly that Saddam Hussein has one last chance to disarm. He hasn't disarmed, and so we're working with Security Council members to resolve this issue at the Security Council. 
This is not only an important moment for the security of our Nation; I believe it's an important moment for the Security Council, itself. And the reason I say that is because this issue has been before the Security Council—the issue of disarmament of Iraq—for 12 long years. And the fundamental question facing the Security Council is, will its words mean anything? When the Security Council speaks, will the words have merit and weight? 
I think it's important for those words to have merit and weight, because I understand that in order to win the war against terror there must be a united effort to do so. We must work together to defeat terror. 
Iraq is a part of the war on terror. Iraq is a country that has got terrorist ties. It's a country with wealth. It's a country that trains terrorists, a country that could arm terrorists. And our fellow Americans must understand, in this new war against terror, that we not only must chase down Al Qaida terrorists, we must deal with weapons of mass destruction as well. 
That's what the United Nations Security Council has been talking about for 12 long years. It's now time for this issue to come to a head at the Security Council, and it will. As far as ultimatums and all the speculation about what may or may not happen, after next week, we'll just wait and see. 
The President. Well, we're days away from resolving this issue at the Security Council. 
The President. We, of course, are consulting with our allies at the United Nations. But I meant what I said: This is the last phase of diplomacy. A little bit more time? Saddam Hussein has had 12 years to disarm. He is deceiving people. That's what's important for our fellow citizens to realize, that if he really intended to disarm, like the world has asked him to do, we would know whether he was disarming. He's trying to buy time. I can understand why. He's been successful with these tactics for 12 years. 
Saddam Hussein is a threat to our Nation. September the 11th changed the strategic thinking, at least as far as I was concerned, for how to protect our country. My job is to protect the American people. It used to be that we could think that you could contain a person like Saddam Hussein, that oceans would protect us from his type of terror. September the 11th should say to the American people that we're now a battlefield, that weapons of mass destruction in the hands of a terrorist organization could be deployed here at home. 
So therefore, I think the threat is real, and so do a lot of other people in my Government. And since I believe the threat is real, and since my most important job is to protect the security of the American people, that's precisely what we'll do. 
Our demands are that Saddam Hussein disarm. We hope he does. We have worked with the international community to convince him to disarm. If he doesn't disarm, we'll disarm him. 
You asked about sharing of intelligence, and I appreciate that, because we do share a lot of intelligence with nations which may or may not agree with us in the Security Council as to how to deal with Saddam Hussein and his threats. We have got roughly 90 countries engaged in Operation Enduring Freedom, chasing down the terrorists. We do communicate a lot, and we will continue to communicate a lot. We must communicate. We must share intelligence. We must share—we must cut off money together. We must smoke these Al Qaida types out one at a time. 
It's in our national interest as well that we deal with Saddam Hussein. But America is not alone in this sentiment. There are a lot of countries who fully understand the threat of Saddam Hussein, a lot of countries realize that the credibility of the Security Council is at stake, a lot of countries, like America, who hope that he would have disarmed, and a lot of countries which realize that it may require force—may require force—to disarm him. 
The President. Well, first, I—I appreciate societies in which people can express their opinion. That society—free speech stands in stark contrast to Iraq. 
I recognize there are people who don't like war. I don't like war. I wish that Saddam Hussein had listened to the demands of the world and disarmed. That was my hope. That's why I first went to the United Nations to begin with, on September the 12th, 2002, to address this issue as forthrightly as I knew how. That's why, months later, we went to the Security Council to get another resolution, called 1441, which was unanimously approved by the Security Council, demanding that Saddam Hussein disarm. 
I'm hopeful that he does disarm. But in the name of peace and the security of our people, if he won't do so voluntarily, we will disarm him. And other nations will join him—join us in disarming him. 
And that creates a certain sense of anxiety. I understand that. Nobody likes war. The only thing I can do is assure the loved ones of those who wear our uniform that if we have to go to war, if war is upon us because Saddam Hussein has made that choice, we will have the best equipment available for our troops, the best plan available for victory, and we will respect innocent life in Iraq. 
The risk of doing nothing, the risk of hoping that Saddam Hussein changes his mind and becomes a gentle soul, the risk that somehow—that inaction will make the world safer, is a risk I'm not willing to take for the American people. 
I believe Saddam Hussein is a threat to the American people. I believe he's a threat to the neighborhood in which he lives, and I've got a good evidence to believe that. He has weapons of mass destruction, and he has used weapons of mass destruction in his neighborhood and on his own people. He's invaded countries in his neighborhood. He tortures his own people. He's a murderer. He has trained and financed Al Qaida-type organizations before, Al Qaida and other terrorist organizations. I take the threat seriously, and I'll deal with the threat. I hope it can be done peacefully. 
The President. Oh, yes. The price of doing nothing exceeds the price of taking action if we have to. We'll do everything we can to minimize the loss of life. The price of the attacks on America, the cost of the attacks on America on September the 11th were enormous. They were significant, and I am not willing to take that chance again, John. 
You clearly named some that—France and Germany expressed their opinions. We have a disagreement over how best to deal with Saddam Hussein. I understand that. Having said that, they're still our friends, and we will deal with them as friends. We've got a lot of common interests. Our transatlantic relationships are very important. While they may disagree with how we deal with Saddam Hussein and his weapons of mass destruction, there's no disagreement when it came time to vote on 1441, at least as far as France was concerned. They joined us. They said Saddam Hussein has one last chance of disarming. If they think more time will cause him to disarm, I disagree with that. 
He's a master at deception. He has no intention of disarming. Otherwise, we would have known. There's a lot of talk about inspectors. It really would have taken a handful of inspectors to determine whether he was disarming. They could have showed up at a parking lot and he could have brought his weapons and destroyed them. That's not what he chose to do. 
Secondly, I make my decisions based upon the oath I took, the one I just described to you. I believe Saddam Hussein is a threat—is a threat to the American people. He's a threat to people in his neighborhood. He's also a threat to the Iraqi people. 
One of the things we love in America is freedom. If I may, I'd like to remind you what I said at the State of the Union: Liberty is not America's gift to the world; it is God's gift to each and every person. And that's what I believe. I believe that when we see totalitarianism, that we must deal with it. We don't have to do it always militarily, but this is a unique circumstance, because of 12 years of denial and defiance, because of terrorist connections, because of past history. 
I'm convinced that a liberated Iraq will be important for that troubled part of the world. The Iraqi people are plenty capable of governing themselves. Iraq is a sophisticated society. Iraq's got money. Iraq will provide a place where people can see that the Shi'a and the Sunni and the Kurds can get along in a federation. Iraq will serve as a catalyst for change, positive change. 
So there's a lot more at stake than just American security and the security of people close by Saddam Hussein. Freedom is at stake as well, and I take that very seriously. 
The President. Well, I hope we don't have to go to war, but if we go to war, we will disarm Iraq. And if we go to war, there will be a regime change. And replacing this cancer inside of Iraq will be a Government that represents the rights of all the people, a Government which represents the voices of the Shi'a and Sunni and the Kurds. 
We care about the suffering of the Iraqi people. I mentioned in my opening comments that there's a lot of food ready to go in. There's something like 55,000 oil-for-food distribution points in Iraq. We know where they are. We fully intend to make sure that they're—got ample food. We know where their hospitals are; we want to make sure they've got ample medical supplies. The life of the Iraqi citizen is going to dramatically improve. 
The President. We will be changing the regime of Iraq, for the good of the Iraqi people. 
The President. Well, Bill, if they believe he should be disarmed, and he's not going to disarm, there's only one way to disarm him. And that happens to be my last choice, the use of force. 
Secondly, the American people know that Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction. By the way, he declared he didn't have any; 1441 insisted that he have a complete declaration of his weapons; he said he didn't have any weapons. Secondly, he's used these weapons before. I mean, this is—we're not speculating about the nature of the man. We know the nature of the man. 
Colin Powell, in an eloquent address to the United Nations, described some of the information we were at liberty of talking about. He mentioned a man named Al Zarqawi, who was in charge of the poison network. He's a man who was wounded in Afghanistan, received aid in Baghdad, ordered the killing of a U.S. citizen, USAID employee, was harbored in Iraq. There is a poison plant in northeast Iraq. To assume that Saddam Hussein knew none of this was going on is not to really understand the nature of the Iraqi society. 
There's a lot of facts which make it clear to me and many others that Saddam is a threat. And we're not going to wait until he does attack. We're not going to hope that he changes his attitude. We're not going to assume that he's a different kind of person than he has been. 
So, in the name of security and peace, if we have to—if we have to—we'll disarm him. I hope he disarms. Or perhaps, I hope he leaves the country. I hear a lot of talk from different nations around where Saddam Hussein might be exiled. That would be fine with me, just so long as Iraq disarms after he's exiled. 
The President. Yes. Well, first, I don't think—it basically says that he's in defiance of 1441. That's what the resolution says, and it's hard to believe anybody is saying he isn't in defiance of 1441, because 1441 said he must disarm. And yes, we'll callfor a vote. 
The President. No matter what the whip count is, we're calling for the vote. We want to see people stand up and say what their opinion is about Saddam Hussein and the utility of the United Nations Security Council. And so, you bet. itistime for people to show their cards, to let the world know where they stand when it comes to Saddam. 
The President. I appreciate that question a lot. First, for those who urge more diplomacy, I would simply say that diplomacy hasn't worked. We've tried diplomacy for 12 years. Saddam Hussein hasn't disarmed; he's armed. 
And we live in a dangerous world. We live in new circumstances in our country. And I hope people remember the—I know they remember the tragedy of September the 11th, but I hope they understand the lesson of September the 11th. The lesson is, is that we're vulnerable to attack, wherever it may occur, and we must take threats which gather overseas very seriously. We don't have to deal with them all militarily. But we must deal with them, and in the case of Iraq, it is now time for him to disarm. For the sake of peace, if we have to use our troops, we will. 
My faith sustains me because I pray daily. I pray for guidance and wisdom and strength. If we were to commit our troops—if we were to commit our troops— I would pray for their safety, and I would pray for the safety of innocent Iraqi lives as well. 
And so I—you know, obviously, I've thought long and hard about the use of troops. I think about it all the time. It is my responsibility to commit the troops. I believe we'll prevail. I know we'll prevail. And out of that disarmament of Saddam will come a better world, particularly for the people who live in Iraq. 
This is a society, Ron, who—which has been decimated by his murderous ways, his torture. He doesn't allow dissent. He doesn't believe in the values we believe in. I believe this society, the Iraqi society, can develop in a much better way. I think of the risks, calculated the cost of inaction versus the cost of action. And I'm firmly convinced, if we have to, we will act, in the name of peace and in the name of freedom. 
The President. Of course. We will give people a chance to leave. And we don't want anybody in harm's way who shouldn't be in harm's way. The journalists who are there should leave. If you're going, and we start action, leave. The inspectors—we don't want people in harm's way. And our intention—we have no quarrel with anybody other than Saddam and his group of killers who have destroyed a society. And we will do everything we can, as I mentioned—and I mean this—to protect innocent life. 
I've not made up our mind about military action. Hopefully, this can be done peacefully. Hopefully, that as a result of the pressure that we have placed—and others have placed—that Saddam will disarm and/or leave the country. 
You know, the benefits of such a effort, if, in fact, we go forward and are successful, are also immeasurable. How do you measure the benefit of freedom in Iraq? I guess if you're an Iraqi citizen, you can measure it by being able to express your mind and vote. How do you measure the consequence of taking a dictator out of power who has tried to invade Kuwait or somebody who may some day decide to lob a weapon of mass destruction on Israel? How would you weigh the cost of that? Those are immeasurable costs. And I weigh those very seriously, Ed. In terms of the dollar amount, well, we'll let you know here pretty soon.
The President. That's a great question. Our mission is clear in Iraq. Should we have to go in, our mission is very clear: disarmament. In order to disarm, it will mean regime change. I'm confident we'll be able to achieve that objective in a way that minimizes the loss of life. No doubt there's risks in any military operation; I know that. But it's very clear what we intend to do. And our mission won't change. Our mission is precisely what I just stated. We have got a plan that will achieve that mission, should we need to send forces in.
The President. You're right, I'm not going to tip my hand. [Laughter] 
The President. Thank you for—thank you. Anything that's debated must have resolution to this issue. It makes no sense to allow this issue to continue on and on in the hopes that Saddam Hussein disarms. The whole purpose of the debate is for Saddam to disarm. We gave him a chance. As a matter of fact, we gave him 12 years of chances. But recently we gave him a chance, starting last fall. And it said, last chance to disarm. The resolution said that. And had he chosen to do so, it'd would be evident that he's disarmed. 
So more time, more inspectors, more process, in our judgment, is not going to affect the peace of the world. So whatever is resolved is going to have some finality to it, so that Saddam Hussein will take us seriously. 
I want to remind you that it's his choice to make as to whether or not we go to war. It's Saddam's choice. He's the person that can make the choice of war and peace. Thus far, he's made the wrong choice. If we have to, for the sake of the security of the American people, for the sake of peace in the world, and for freedom to the Iraqi people, we will disarm Saddam Hussein. And by "we," it's more than America. A lot of nations will join us. 

The President's Radio Address
March 8, 2003
Second, the chief United Nations weapons inspector reported yesterday to the Security Council on his efforts to verify Saddam Hussein's compliance with Resolution 1441. This resolution requires Iraq to fully and unconditionally disarm itself of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons materials, as well as the prohibited missiles that could be used to deliver them. Unfortunately, it is clear that Saddam Hussein is still violating the demands of the United Nations by refusing to disarm. 
Iraqi's dictator has made a public show of producing and destroying a few prohibited missiles. Yet, our intelligence shows that even as he is destroying these few missiles, he has ordered the continued production of the very same type of missiles. Iraqi operatives continue to play a shell game with inspectors, moving suspected prohibited materials to different locations every 12 to 24 hours. And Iraqi weapons scientists continue to be threatened with harm should they cooperate in interviews with U.N. inspectors. 
These are not the actions of a regime that is disarming. These are the actions of a regime engaged in a willful charade. If the Iraqi regime were disarming, we would know it because we would see it. Iraq's weapons would be presented to inspectors and destroyed. Inspection teams do not need more time or more personnel. All they need is what they have never received, the full cooperation of the Iraqi regime. The only acceptable outcome is the outcome already demanded by a unanimous vote of the Security Council, total disarmament. 
Saddam Hussein has a long history of reckless aggression and terrible crimes. He possesses weapons of terror. He provides funding and training and safe haven to terrorists who would willingly deliver weapons of mass destruction against America and other peace-loving countries. 
The attacks of September the 11th, 2001, showed what the enemies of America did with four airplanes. We will not wait to see what terrorists or terror states could do with weapons of mass destruction. We are determined to confront threats wherever they arise. And as a last resort, we must be willing to use military force. We are doing everything we can to avoid war in Iraq. But if Saddam Hussein does not disarm peacefully, he will be disarmed by force. 
Across the world and in every part of America, people of good will are hoping and praying for peace. Our goal is peace for our own Nation, for our friends, for our allies, and for all the peoples of the Middle East. People of good will must also recognize that allowing a dangerous dictator to defy the world and build an arsenal for conquest and mass murder is not peace at all; it is pretense. The cause of peace will be advanced only when the terrorists lose a wealthy patron and protector and when the dictator is fully and finally disarmed. 

Remarks at a Saint Patrick's Day Shamrock Presentation Ceremony With Prime Minister Bertie Ahern of Ireland
March 13, 2003
The American people appreciate Ireland's work on U.N. Security Council to help secure passage of the Resolution 1441. That resolution demanded that Iraq disarm itself of all weapons of mass destruction. We appreciate Ireland's support for ensuring that the just demands of the world are enforced. The responsibilities of freedom are not always easy to bear, but Ireland and America are joined by a common commitment to freedom's defense against tyranny and terror.

The President's Radio Address
March 15, 2003
Good morning. This weekend marks a bitter anniversary for the people of Iraq. Fifteen years ago, Saddam Hussein's regime ordered a chemical weapons attack on a village in Iraq called Halabja. With that single order, the regime killed thousands of Iraq's Kurdish citizens. Whole families died while trying to flee clouds of nerve and mustard agents descending from the sky. Many who managed to survive still suffer from cancer, blindness, respiratory diseases, miscarriages, and severe birth defects among their children. 
The chemical attack on Halabja, just one of 40 targeted at Iraq's own people, provided a glimpse of the crimes Saddam Hussein is willing to commit and the kind of threat he now presents to the entire world. He is among history's cruelest dictators, and he is arming himself with the world's most terrible weapons. 
Recognizing this threat, the United Nations Security Council demanded that Saddam Hussein give up all his weapons of mass destruction as a condition for ending the Gulf war 12 years ago. The Security Council has repeated this demand numerous times and warned that Iraq faces serious consequences if it fails to comply. Iraq has responded with defiance, delay, and deception. 
The United States, Great Britain, and Spain continue to work with fellow members of the U.N. Security Council to confront this common danger. We have seen far too many instances in the past decade, from Bosnia to Rwanda to Kosovo, where the failure of the Security Council to act decisively has led to tragedy. And we must recognize that some threats are so grave and their potential consequences so terrible that they must be removed, even if it requires military force. 
As diplomatic efforts continue, we must never lose sight of the basic facts about the regime of Baghdad. We know from recent history that Saddam Hussein is a reckless dictator who has twice invaded his neighbors without provocation, wars that led to death and suffering on a massive scale. We know from human rights groups that dissidents in Iraq are tortured, imprisoned, and sometimes just disappear; their hands, feet, and tongues are cut off; their eyes are gouged out; and female relatives are raped in their presence. 
As the Nobel laureate and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel said this week, "We have a moral obligation to intervene where evil is in control. Today, that place is Iraq." 
We know from prior weapons inspections that Saddam has failed to account for vast quantities of biological and chemical agents, including mustard agent, botulinum toxin, and sarin, capable of killing millions of people. We know the Iraqi regime finances and sponsors terror. And we know the regime has plans to place innocent people around military installations to act as human shields. 
There is little reason to hope that Saddam Hussein will disarm. If force is required to disarm him, the American people can know that our Armed Forces have been given every tool and every resource to achieve victory. The people of Iraq can know that every effort will be made to spare innocent life and to help Iraq recover from three decades of totalitarian rule. And plans are in place to provide Iraqis with massive amounts of food, as well as medicine and other essential supplies, in the event of hostilities. 
Crucial days lie ahead for the free nations of the world. Governments are now showing whether their stated commitments to liberty and security are words alone or convictions they're preparedtoact upon. And for the Government of the United States and the coalition we lead, there is no doubt: We will confront a growing danger, to protect ourselves, to remove a patron and protector of terror, and to keep the peace of the world. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Jose Manuel Durao Barroso of Portugal, President Jose Maria Aznar of Spain, and Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom in the Azores, Portugal
March 16, 2003
The dictator of Iraq and his weapons of mass destruction are a threat to the security of free nations. He is a danger to his neighbors. He's a sponsor of terrorism. He's an obstacle to progress in the Middle East. For decades, he has been the cruel, cruel oppressor of the Iraq people. 
On this very day 15 years ago, Saddam Hussein launched a chemical weapons attack on the Iraqi village of Halabja. With a single order, the Iraqi regime killed thousands of men and women and children, without mercy or without shame. Saddam Hussein has proven he is capable of any crime. We must notpermit his crimes to reach across the world. 
Saddam Hussein has a history of mass murder. He possesses the weapons of mass murder. He agrees—he agreed to disarm Iraq of these weapons as a condition for ending the Gulf war over a decade ago. The United Nations Security Council in Resolution 1441 has declared Iraq in material breach of its longstanding obligations, demanded once again Iraq's full and immediate disarmament, and promised serious consequences if the regime refused to comply. That resolution was passed unanimously, and its logic is inescapable: The Iraqi regime will disarm itself, or the Iraqi regime will be disarmed by force. And the regime has not disarmed itself. 
Action to remove the threat from Iraq would also allow the Iraqi people to build a better future for their society. And Iraq's liberation would be the beginning, not the end, of ourcommitment to its people. We will supply humanitarian relief, bring economic sanctions to a swift close, and work for the long-term recovery of Iraq's economy. We'll make sure that Iraq's natural resources are used for the benefit of their owners, the Iraqi people. 
Iraq has the potential to be a great nation. Iraq's people are skilled and educated. We'll push as quickly as possible for an Iraqi interim authority to draw upon the talents of Iraq's people to rebuild their nation. We're committed to the goal of a unified Iraq, with democratic institutions of which members of all ethnic and religious groups are treated with dignity and respect. 
To achieve this vision, we will work closely with the international community, including the United Nations and our coalition partners. If military force is required, we'll quickly seek new Security Council resolutions to encourage broad participation in the process of helping the Iraqi people to build a free Iraq. 
President Bush. That's what I'm saying. 
President Bush. Tomorrow is the day that we will determine whether or not diplomacy can work. And we sat and visited about this issue, about how best to spend our time between now and tomorrow. And as Prime Minister Blair said, we'll be working the phones and talking to our partners and talking to those who may not clearly understand the objective, and we'll see how it goes tomorrow. 
Saddam Hussein can leave the country, if he's interested in peace. You see, the decision is his to make. And it's been his to make all along as to whether or not there's the use of the military. He got to decide whether he was going to disarm, and he didn't. He can decide whether he wants to leave the country. These are his decisions to make, and thus far he has made bad decisions. 
President Bush. [Inaudible]—Resolution 1441, which was unanimously approved, that says Saddam Hussein would unconditionally disarm, and if he didn't, there would be serious consequences. The United Nations Security Council looked at the issue 4 1/2 months ago and voted unanimously to say: Disarm immediately and unconditionally, and if you don't, there are going to be serious consequences. The world has spoken. And it did in a unified voice. 
President Bush. I was the guy that said they ought to vote. And one country voted. They showed their cards, I believe. It's an old Texas expression, "Show your cards," when you're playing poker. France showed their cards. After I said what I said, they said they were going to veto anything that held Saddam to account. So cards have been played, and we'll just have to take an assessment after tomorrow to determine what that card meant. 
And the U.N. must mean something. Remember Rwanda, or Kosovo. The U.N. didn't do its job. And we hope tomorrow the U.N. will do its job. If not, all of us need to step back and try to figure out how to make the U.N. work better as we head into the 21st century. Perhaps one way will be, if we use military force, in the post-Saddam Iraq the U.N. will definitely need to have a role. And that way it can begin to get its legs—legs of responsibility back. 
But it's important for the U.N. to be able to function well if we're going to keep the peace. And I will work hard to see to it that, at least from our perspective, that the U.N. is able to be a responsible body, and when it says something, it means it, for the sake of peace and for the sake of the security, for the capacity to win the war of—the first war of the 21st century, which is the war against terrorism and weapons of mass destruction in the hands of dictators. 

Address to the Nation on Iraq
March 17, 2003
My fellow citizens, events in Iraq have now reached the final days of decision. For more than a decade, the United States and other nations have pursued patient and honorable efforts to disarm the Iraqi regime without war. That regime pledged to reveal and destroy all its weapons of mass destruction as a condition for ending the Persian Gulf war in 1991. 
Since then, the world has engaged in 12 years of diplomacy. We have passed more than a dozen resolutions in the United Nations Security Council. We have sent hundreds of weapons inspectors to oversee the disarmament of Iraq. Our good faith has not been returned. 
The Iraqi regime has used diplomacy as a ploy to gain time and advantage. It has uniformly defied Security Council resolutions demanding full disarmament. Over the years, U.N. weapon inspectors have been threatened by Iraqi officials, electronically bugged, and systematically deceived. Peaceful efforts to disarm the Iraqi regime have failed again and again because we are not dealing with peaceful men. 
Intelligence gathered by this and other governments leaves no doubt that the Iraq regime continues to possess and conceal some of the most lethal weapons ever devised. This regime has already used weapons of mass destruction against Iraq's neighbors and against Iraq's people. 
The regime has a history of reckless aggression in the Middle East. It has a deep hatred of America and our friends. And it has aided, trained, and harbored terrorists, including operatives of Al Qaida. 
The danger is clear: Using chemical, biological or, one day, nuclear weapons obtained with the help of Iraq, the terrorists could fulfill their stated ambitions and kill thousands or hundreds of thousands of innocent people in our country or any other. 
The United States and other nations did nothing to deserve or invite this threat. But we will do everything to defeat it. Instead of drifting along toward tragedy, we will set a course toward safety. Before the day of horror can come, before it is too late to act, this danger will be removed. 
The United States of America has the sovereign authority to use force in assuring its own national security. That duty falls to me as Commander in Chief, by the oath I have sworn, by the oath I will keep. 
Recognizing the threat to our country, the United States Congress voted overwhelmingly last year to support the use of force against Iraq. America tried to work with the United Nations to address this threat because we wanted to resolve the issue peacefully. We believe in the mission of the United Nations. One reason theU.N. was founded after the Second World War was to confront aggressive dictators actively and early, before they can attack the innocent and destroy the peace. 
In the case of Iraq, the Security Council did act in the early 1990s. Under Resolutions 678 and 687, both still in effect, the United States and our allies are authorized to use force in ridding Iraq of weapons of mass destruction. This is not a question of authority. It is a question of will. 
Last September, I went to the U.N. General Assembly and urged the nations of the world to unite and bring an end to this danger. On November 8th, the Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1441, finding Iraq in material breach of its obligations and vowing serious consequences if Iraq did not fully and immediately disarm. 
Today, no nation can possibly claim that Iraq has disarmed, and it will not disarm so long as Saddam Hussein holds power. For the last 4 1/2 months, the United States and our allies have worked within the Security Council to enforce that Council's long-standing demands. Yet, some permanent members of the Security Council have publicly announced they will veto any resolution that compels the disarmament of Iraq. These governments share our assessment of the danger but not ourresolve to meet it. 
Many nations, however, do have the resolve and fortitude to act against this threat to peace, and a broad coalition is now gathering to enforce the just demands of the world. The United Nations Security Council has not lived up to its responsibilities, so we will rise to ours. 
In recent days, some governments in the Middle East have been doing their part. They have delivered public and private messages urging the dictator to leave Iraq, so that disarmament can proceed peacefully. He has thus far refused. 
All the decades of deceit and cruelty have now reached an end. Saddam Hussein and his sons must leave Iraq within 48 hours. Their refusal to do so will result in military conflict, commenced at a time of our choosing. For their own safety, all foreign nationals, including journalists and inspectors, should leave Iraq immediately. 
Many Iraqis can hear me tonight in a translated radio broadcast, and I have a message for them: If we must begin a military campaign, it will be directed against the lawless men who rule your country and not against you. As our coalition takes away their power, we will deliver the food and medicine you need. We will tear down the apparatus of terror, and we will help you to build a new Iraq that is prosperous and free. In a free Iraq, there will be no more wars of aggression against your neighbors, no more poison factories, no more executions of dissidents, no more torture chambers and rape rooms. The tyrant will soon be gone. The day of your liberation is near. 
It is too late for Saddam Hussein to remain in power. It is not too late for the Iraqi military to act with honor and protect your country by permitting the peaceful entry of coalition forces to eliminate weapons of mass destruction. Our forces will give Iraqi military units clear instructions on actions they can take to avoid being attacked and destroyed. I urge every member of the Iraqi military and intelligence services: If war comes, do not fight for a dying regime that is not worth your own life. 
And all Iraqi military and civilian personnel should listen carefully to this warning: In any conflict, your fate will depend on your actions. Do not destroy oil wells, a source of wealth that belongs to the Iraqi people. Do not obey any command to use weapons of mass destruction against anyone, including the Iraqi people. War crimes will be prosecuted. War criminals will be punished. And it will be no defense to say, "I was just following orders." 
Should Saddam Hussein choose confrontation, the American people can know that every measure has been taken to avoid war and every measure will be taken to win it. Americans understand the costs of conflict because we have paid them in the past. War has no certainty, except the certainty of sacrifice. Yet, the only way to reduce the harm and duration of war is to apply the full force and might of our military, and we are prepared to do so. 
If Saddam Hussein attempts to cling to power, he will remain a deadly foe until the end. In desperation, he and terrorists groups might try to conduct terrorist operations against the American people and our friends. These attacks are not inevitable. They are, however, possible. And this very fact underscores the reason we cannot live under the threat of blackmail. The terrorist threat to America and the world will be diminished the moment that Saddam Hussein is disarmed. 
Our Government is on heightened watch against these dangers. Just as we are preparing to ensure victory in Iraq, we are taking further actions to protect our homeland. In recent days, American authorities have expelled from the country certain individuals with ties to Iraqi intelligence services. Among other measures, I have directed additional security of our airports and increased Coast Guard patrols of major seaports. The Department of Homeland Security is working closely with the Nation's Governors to increase armed security at critical facilities across America. 
Should enemies strike our country, they would be attempting to shift our attention with panic and weaken our morale with fear. In this, they would fail. No act of theirs can alter the course or shake the resolve of this country. We are a peaceful people. Yet we're not a fragile people, and we will not be intimidated by thugs and killers. If our enemies dare to strike us, they and all who have aided them will face fearful consequences. 
We are now acting because the risks of inaction would be far greater. In 1 year, or 5 years, the power of Iraq to inflict harm on all free nations would be multiplied many times over. With these capabilities, Saddam Hussein and his terrorist allies could choose the moment of deadly conflict when they are strongest. We choose to meet that threat now, where it arises, before it can appear suddenly in our skies and cities. 
The cause of peace requires all free nations to recognize new and undeniable realities. In the 20th century, some chose to appease murderous dictators, whose threats were allowed to grow into genocide and global war. In this century, when evil men plot chemical, biological, and nuclear terror, a policy of appeasement could bring destruction of a kind never before seen on this Earth. 
Terrorists and terror states do not reveal these threats with fair notice, in formal declarations. And responding to such enemies only after they have struck first is not self-defense; it is suicide. The security of the world requires disarming Saddam Hussein now. 
As we enforce the just demands of the world, we will also honor the deepest commitments of our country. Unlike Saddam Hussein, we believe the Iraqi people are deserving and capable of human liberty. And when the dictator has departed, they can set an example to all the Middle East of a vital and peaceful and self-governing nation. 
The United States, with other countries, will work to advance liberty and peace in that region. Our goal will not be achieved overnight, but it can come over time. The power and appeal of human liberty is felt in every life and every land. And the greatest power of freedom is to overcome hatred and violence and turn the creative gifts of men and women to the pursuits of peace. 
That is the future we choose. Free nations have a duty to defend our people by uniting against the violent. And tonight, as we have done before, America and our allies accept that responsibility. 

Address to the Nation on Iraq
March 19, 2003
My fellow citizens, at this hour, American and coalition forces are in the early stages of military operations to disarm Iraq, to free its people, and to defend the world from grave danger. 
On my orders, coalition forces have begun striking selected targets of military importance to undermine Saddam Hussein's ability to wage war. These are opening stages of what will be a broad and concerted campaign. More than 35 countries are giving crucial support, from the use of naval and air bases, to help with intelligence and logistics, to the deployment of combat units. Every nation in this coalition has chosen to bear the duty and share the honor of serving in our common defense. 
To all the men and women of the United States Armed Forces now in the Middle East, the peace of a troubled world and the hopes of an oppressed people now depend on you. That trust is well-placed. The enemies you confront will come to know your skill and bravery. The people you liberate will witness the honorable and decent spirit of the American military. 
In this conflict, America faces an enemy who has no regard for conventions of war or rules of morality. Saddam Hussein has placed Iraqi troops and equipment in civilian areas, attempting to use innocent men, women, and children as shields for his own military, a final atrocity against his people. I want Americans and all the world to know that coalition forces will make every effort to spare innocent civilians from harm. 
A campaign on the harsh terrain of a nation as large as California could be longer and more difficult than some predict. And helping Iraqis achieve a united, stable, and free country will require our sustained commitment. We come to Iraq with respect for its citizens, for their great civilization, and for the religious faiths they practice. We have no ambition in Iraq except to remove a threat and restore control of that country to its own people. 
I know that the families of our military are praying that all those who serve will return safely and soon. Millions of Americans are praying with you for the safety of your loved ones and for the protection of the innocent. For your sacrifice, you have the gratitude and respect of the American people. And you can know that our forces will be coming home as soon as their work is done. 
Our Nation enters this conflict reluctantly. Yet our purpose is sure. The people of the United States and our friends and allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder. We will meet that threat now with our Army, Air Force, Navy, Coast Guard, and Marines, so that we do not have to meet it later with armies of firefighters and police and doctors on the streets of our cities. 
Now that conflict has come, the only way to limit its duration is to apply decisive force. And I assure you, this will not be a campaign of half measures, and we will accept no outcome but victory. 
My fellow citizens, the dangers to our country and the world will be overcome. We will pass through this time of peril and carry on the work of peace. We will defend our freedom. We will bring freedom to others, and we will prevail. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders and an Exchange With Reporters
March 21, 2003
The President. I've asked the Members of Congress to come up so that members of my administration can keep the leadership up to date as the war to liberate Iraq and to remove weapons of mass destruction out of Iraq proceeds. The military briefings, of course, will continue to be given out of the Pentagon. Secretary Rumsfeld will be briefing this afternoon. 
As Secretary Rumsfeld said, we're making progress. We will stay on task until we've achieved our objective, which is to rid Iraq of weapons of mass destruction and free the Iraqi people so they can live in a society that is hopeful and democratic and at peace in its neighborhood. 
The President. Secretary Rumsfeld will be briefing today. 
The President. Secretary Rumsfeld will be briefing today.

The President's Radio Address
March 22, 2003
Good morning. American and coalition forces have begun a concerted campaign against the regime of Saddam Hussein. In this war, our coalition is broad, more than 40 countries from across the globe. Our cause is just: The security of the nations we serve and the peace of the world. And our mission is clear: To disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction; to end Saddam Hussein's support for terrorism; and to free the Iraqi people. 
The future of peace and the hopes of the Iraqi people now depend on our fighting forces in the Middle East. They are conducting themselves in the highest traditions of the American military. They are doing their job with skill and bravery and with the finest of allies beside them. At every stage of this conflict, the world will see both the power of our military and the honorable and decent spirit of the men and women who serve. 
In this conflict, American and coalition forces face enemies who have no regard for the conventions of war or rules of morality. Iraqi officials have placed troops and equipment in civilian areas, attempting to use innocent men, women, and children as shields for the dictator's army. I want Americans and all the world to know that coalition forces will make every effort to spare innocent civilians from harm. 
A campaign on harsh terrain in a vast country could be longer and more difficult than some have predicted. And helping Iraqis achieve a united, stable, and free country will require our sustained commitment. Yet, whateverisrequired of us, we will carry out all the duties we have accepted. 
Our Nation entered this conflict reluctantly, yet with a clear and firm purpose. The people of the United States and our friends and allies will not live at the mercy of an outlaw regime that threatens the peace with weapons of mass murder. Now that conflict has come, the only way to limit its duration is to apply decisive force. This will not be a campaign of half-measures. It is a fight for the security of our Nation and the peace of the world, and we will accept no outcome but victory

Remarks on Operation Iraqi Freedom and an Exchange With Reporters
March 23, 2003
The President. I am pleased with the progress that we're making in the early stages of a—of the war to rid Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction and to free the Iraqi people from the clutches of a brutal dictatorship. 
Today in our church service, Laura and I prayed for the coalition forces, those in the coalition forces who lost their lives. We pray for their families. We ask God's comfort for those who mourn today. And we thank all the coalition forces for their bravery and courage in Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
It is evident that it's going to take a while to achieve our objective, but we're on course, we're determined, and we're making good progress. 
The President. I've been briefed, I'm constantly briefed by the Pentagon and through the National Security Office. I would—I don't know all the details yet. I do know that we expect them to be treated humanely, just like we'll treat any prisoners of theirs that we capture humanely. 
I think it's an interesting contrast that a lot of their soldiers welcome American troops. They're surrendering gleefully, happily. And they'll be treated well. And I ask you to ask the Defense Department for further details. 
The President. I know that Saddam Hussein is losing control of his country, that we're slowly but surely achieving our objective. 
It's important for the American people to realize that this war has just begun, that it may seem like a long time because of all the action on TV, but in terms of the overall strategy, we're just in the beginning phases, and that we're executing a plan which will make it easier to achieve objective and, at the same time, spare innocent life. 
The President. Yes, Larry, it is. It is, and I—the air campaign is achieving its objective, and the ground campaign is also achieving objective. We're slowly but surely taking control of that country so that we can free the people of Iraq and eventually clear that country of weapons of mass destruction. We've made good progress. 
One of the big concerns early on was the southern oilfields. As you all remember, we had discussions about that. There was a lot of speculation about whether or not coalition forces would be able to get to the southern oilfields in time, before—so that Saddam Hussein wouldn't destroy them. As a matter of fact, I had frequently talked about the southern oilfields or oil-fields in general in my declaratory policy. Tommy Franks put a plan in place that moved on those oilfields quickly, and at least in the south, they are secure. And that is positive news for all of us. 
Most of the south is now in coalition hands. Obviously, there's pockets of resistance in a place like Basra. We're making great progress—in the west, we're making great progress. The area, the launch sites for the scuds, while certainly not 100 percent secure, but we've made good progress. 
And so I can assure the American people we're making good progress, and I also can assure them that this is just the beginning of a tough fight. 
The President. I have not been told that. I have been told that we have a problem with potential capture. I'm waiting to— when I get back upstairs, I'll talk back to the Pentagon again. I was told early this morning that perhaps our troops were captured. Maybe between the time I left Camp David and here I'll learn more. But I am concerned about our troops. Obviously, anytime one of our soldiers loses a life, I grieve with their parents and their loved ones. And if there is somebody captured—and it looks like there may be— I expect those people to be treated humanely. 
The President. I—all I know is we've got a game plan, a strategy to free the Iraqi people from Saddam Hussein and rid his country of weapons of mass destruction, and we're on plan. 
The President. I expect them to be treat-ed—the POWs I expect to be treated humanely. And—just like we're treating the prisoners that we have captured humanely. If not, the people who mistreat the prisoners will be treated as war criminals. 
The President. You know, Mike, I—he had his chance to go into exile. I gave him a 48-hour ultimatum to leave the country so that we could disarm Iraq peacefully. He chose not to go into exile. 
The President. We have got more troops up north, and we're making it very clear to the Turks that we expect them not to come into northern Iraq. We're in constant touch with the Turkish military as well as Turkish politicians. They know our policy, and it's a firm policy. And we've made it very clear to them we expect them not to go into northern Iraq as well as—and they know we're working with the Kurds to make sure there's not an incident that would cause there to be an excuse to go into northern Iraq. 
The President. I am thankful the enemy has not used any weapons of mass destruction. And we will continue employing a strategy to make it difficult for the enemy to use weapons of mass destruction. 
The President. Of course. 
The President. Good question. I appreciate you asking that question. The question is on humanitarian aid. In the south of Iraq, coalition forces have worked hard to make the port area secure, to make the transit of humanitarian aid as safe as possible. As—I was told this morning in my briefings that humanitarian aid should begin moving—massive amounts of humanitarian aid should begin moving within the next 36 hours. And that's going to be very positive news for a lot of people who have suffered a long time under Saddam Hussein. 
We've got a massive ground assault going on, and right behind it will be a massive movement of humanitarian aid to help the people of Iraq. We have made that promise to the people of this country that we will do everything we can to protect innocent life. And we're doing that. And we'll do everything we can to help the Iraqi people. First thing, of course, that will help the Iraqi people is to rid them from a brutal dictator, somebody who has stayed in power through mutilation and rape and torture, somebody who has starved his own people so he could build palaces. When free from that dictatorship, life will be a lot better. 
But we also understand we have an obligation—and this is just not America; it's coalition forces—have an obligation to put food and medicine in places so the Iraqi people can live a normal life and have hope. And that's exactly what's going to happen shortly when the area is completely—safe enough to move the equipment forward. 

Remarks at the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia
March 25, 2003
Thank you all. Please be seated. Well, good morning. Thanks for coming. I've just met with our leaders here at the Pentagon, who are monitoring the course of our battle to free Iraq and rid that country of weapons of mass destruction. Our coalition is on a steady advance. We're making good progress. 
We're fighting an enemy that knows no rules of law, that will wear civilian uniforms, that is willing to kill in order to continue the reign of fear of Saddam Hussein. But we're fighting with bravery and courage. 
We cannot know the duration of this war. Yet we know its outcome: We will prevail. The Iraqi regime will be disarmed. The Iraqi regime will be ended. The Iraqi people will be free, and our world will be more secure and peaceful. 
The people of our military and their families are showing great courage, and some have suffered great loss. America is grateful to all those who have sacrificed in our cause. 
Our coalition is strong. It's bound together by the principle of protecting not only this Nation but all nations from a brutal regime that is armed with weapons that could kill thousands of innocent people. America has more than 200,000 men and women engaged in Operation Iraqi Freedom. 
Our troops also continue to fight bravely in other fronts of this war on terror. In Afghanistan last week, coalition forces launched Operation Valiant Strike against terrorists and their allies in the southern mountains of Afghanistan. Of course, we have troops standing watch in other parts of the world to protect and maintain the peace. All the members of the military, abroad, at home, or here in this important building, are bound together by a great cause, to defend the American people and advance the universal hope of freedom. 
America has accepted this responsibility. We also accept the cost of supporting our military and the missions we give it. Today I'm sending the Congress a wartime supplemental appropriations request of $74.7 billion, to fund needs directly arising from the Iraqi conflict and our global war against terror. 
My request to Congress will pay for the massive task of transporting a fully equipped military force, both active duty and reserve, to a region halfway around the world. This money will cover the current cost of fueling our ships and aircraft and tanks and of airlifting tons of supplies into the theater of operations. The supplemental will also allow us to replace the high-tech munitions we are now directing against Saddam Hussein's regime. 
My request includes funds for relief and reconstruction in a free Iraq. This Nation and our coalition partners arecommitted to making sure that the Iraqi citizens who have suffered under a brutal tyrant have got the food and medicine needed as soon as possible. 
Tommy Franks briefed us this morning about coalition efforts to demine the harbors—the harbor—to make sure that our humanitarian relief can be delivered safely to the Iraqi people. Coalition forces are working hard to make sure that when the food and medicine begins to move, it does so in a safe way. And soon, the Iraqi people will see the great compassion of not only the United States but other nations around the world who care deeply about the human condition inside that country. 
Our campaign in Iraq involves assistance of coalition partners and friends in the Middle East. The funding request to Congress will help reduce the economic burdens these countries have experienced in supporting our efforts. Also included are funds essential to waging and helping our partners wage the broader war on terror, which continues in Afghanistan, in the Philippines, and elsewhere. 

Remarks at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida
March 26, 2003
We're also proud to be here today with our friends and allies, representative of the 48 nations across the world who have joined America in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Over the last week, the world has witnessed the skill and honor and resolve of our military in the course of battle. We have seen the character of this new generation of American Armed Forces. We've seen their daring against ruthless enemies and their decency to an oppressed people. Millions of Americans are proud of our military, and so am I. I am honored to be the Commander in Chief.
MacDill is the command center of our Special Operations Forces, the silent warriors who were first on the ground there in Iraq. And here at CENTCOM, you coordinate the work of a grand coalition that is disarming a dangerous enemy and freeing a proud people. 
Every nation in our coalition understands the terrible threat we face from weapons of mass destruction. Every nation represented here refuses to live in a future of fear, at the mercy of terrorists and tyrants. And every nation here today shares the same resolve: We will be relentless in our pursuit of victory. 
Our military is making good progress in Iraq; yet this war is far from over. As they approach Baghdad, our fighting units are facing the most desperate elements of a doomed regime. We cannot know the duration of this war, but we are prepared for the battle ahead. We cannot predict the final day of the Iraqi regime, but I can assure you, and I assure the long-suffering people of Iraq, there will be a day of reckoning for the Iraqi regime, and that day is drawing near. 
Many of you here today were also involved in the liberation of Afghanistan. The military demands are very different in Iraq. Yet our coalition is showing the same spirit, the same resolve—that spirit and resolve that destroyed the Al Qaida terror camps, that routed the Taliban and freed the people of Afghanistan. 
In Iraq today, our military is focused and unwavering. We have an effective plan of battle and the flexibility to meet every challenge. Nothing—nothing—will divert us from our clear mission. We will press on through every hardship. We will overcome every danger, and we will prevail. 
It has been 6 days since the major ground war began. It's been 5 days since the major air war began. And every day has brought us closer to our objective. At the opening of Operation Iraqi Freedom, Special Forces helped to secure airfields and bridges and oilfields, to clear the way for our forces and to prevent sabotage and environmental catastrophe. Our pilots and cruise missiles have struck vital military targets with lethal precision. 
We've destroyed the base of a terrorist group in northern Iraq that sought to attack America and Europe with deadly poisons. We have moved over 200 miles to the north, toward Iraq's capital, in the last 3 days. And the dictator's major Republican Guard units are now under direct and intense attack. Day by day, Saddam Hussein is losing his grip on Iraq. Day by day, the Iraqi people are closer to freedom. 
We are also taking every action we can to prevent the Iraqi regime from using its hidden weapons of mass destruction. We are attacking the command structure that could order the use of those weapons. Coalition troops have taken control of hundreds of square miles of territory to prevent the launch of missiles and chemical or biological weapons. 
All the nations in our coalition are contributing to our steady progress. British ground forces have seized strategic towns and ports. The Royal Air Force is striking targets throughout Iraq. The Royal Navy is taking command of coastal waters. The Australian military is providing naval gunfire support and Special Forces and fighter aircraft on missions deep in Iraq. Polish military forces have secured an Iraqi oil platform in the Persian Gulf. A Danish submarine is monitoring Iraqi intelligence, providing early warning. Czech, Slovak, Polish, and Romanian forces, soon to be joined by Ukrainian and Bulgarian forces, are forward-deployed in the region, prepared to respond in the event of an attack of weapons of mass destruction anywhere in the region. Spain is providing important logistical and humanitarian support. Coalition forces are skilled and courageous, and we are honored to have them by our side. 
In the early stages of this war, the world is getting a clearer view of the Iraqi regime and the evil at its heart. In the ranks of that regime are men whose idea of courage is to brutalize unarmed prisoners. They wage attacks while posing as civilians. They use real civilians as human shields. They pretend to surrender, then fire upon those who show them mercy. This band of war criminals has been put on notice: The day of Iraq's liberation will also be a day of justice. 
And in the early stages of this war, we have also seen the honor of the American military and our coalition. Protecting innocent civilians is a central commitment of our war plan. Our enemy in this war is the Iraqi regime, not the people who have suffered under it. As we bring justice to a dictator, today we started bringing humanitarian aid in large amounts to an oppressed land. 
We are treating Iraqi prisoners of war according to the highest standards of law and decency. Coalition doctors are working to save the lives of the wounded, including Iraqi soldiers. One of our servicemen said this about the injured Iraqis he treated: "We can't blame them for the mistreatment that their Government is doing to our soldiers. I'm all for treating them. That's what we do. That's our job." 
Our entire coalition has a job to do, and it will not end with the liberation of Iraq. We will help the Iraqi people to find the benefits and assume the duties of self-government. The form of those institutions will arise from Iraq's own culture and its own choices. Yet, this much is certain: The 24 million people of Iraq have lived too long under a violent criminal gang calling itself a government. 
Iraqis are a good and gifted people. They deserve better than a life spent bowing before a dictator. The people of Iraq deserve to stand on their feet as free men and women, the citizens of a free country. 
This goal of a free and peaceful Iraq unites our coalition. And this goal comes from the deepest convictions of America. The freedom you defend is the right of every person and the future of every nation. The liberty we prize is not American's gift to the world; it is God's gift to humanity. 
The Army Special Forces define their mission in a motto: "To Liberate the Oppressed." Generations of men and women in uniform have served and sacrificed in this cause. Now the call of history has come once again to all in our military and to all in our coalition. We are answering that call. We have no ambition in Iraq except the liberation of its people. We ask no reward except a durable peace. And we will accept no outcome short of complete and final success. 
The path we are taking is not easy, and it may be long. Yet we know our destination. We will stay on the path, mile by mile, all the way to Baghdad and all the way to victory. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom at Camp David, Maryland
March 27, 2003
The United States and United Kingdom are acting together in a noble purpose. We're working together to make the world more peaceful. We're working together to make our respective nations and all the free nations of the world more secure, and we're working to free the Iraqi people. 
British, American, Australian, Polish, and other coalition troops are sharing the duties of this war, and we're sharing the sacrifices of this war. Together, coalition forces are advancing day by day, in steady progress, against the enemy. Slowly but surely, the grip of terror around the throats of the Iraqi people is being loosened. 
We appreciate the bravery, the professionalism of the British troops and all coalition troops. Together we have lost people, and the American people offer their prayers to the loved ones of the British fallen, just as we offer our prayers to the loved ones of our own troops who have fallen. 
We're now engaging the dictator's most hardened and most desperate units. The campaign ahead will demand further courage and require further sacrifice. Yet we know the outcome: Iraq will be disarmed; the Iraqi regime will be ended; and the long-suffering Iraqi people will be free. 
In decades of oppression, the Iraqi regime has sought to instill the habits of fear in the daily lives of millions. Yet, soon, the Iraqis will have the confidence of a free people. Our coalition will stand with the citizens of Iraq in the challenges ahead. We are prepared to deliver humanitarian aid on a large scale and, as a matter of fact, are beginning to do so as we speak. 
Today the Prime Minister and I also urge the United Nations to immediately resume the oil-for-food program. More than half the Iraqi people depend on this program as their sole source of food. This urgent humanitarian issue must not be politicized, and the Security Council should give Secretary-General Annan the authority to start getting food supplies to those most in need of assistance. 
As we address the immediate suffering of the Iraqi people, we're also committed to helping them over the long term. Iraq's greatest long-term need is a representative government that protects the rights of all Iraqis. The form of this government will be chosen by the Iraqi people, not imposed by outsiders. And the Prime Minister and I are confident that a free Iraq will be a successful nation. 
President Bush. I'll answer that question very quickly and then get to his. However long it takes to win. That's—— 
President Bush. However long it takes to achieve our objective. And that's important for you to know, the American people to know, our allies to know, and the Iraqi people to know. 
President Bush. However long it takes. That's the answer to your question, and that's what you've got to know. It isn't a matter of timetable; it's a matter of victory. And the Iraqi people have got to know that, see. They've got to know that they will be liberated and Saddam Hussein will be removed, no matter how long it takes. 
President Bush. You heard the Prime Minister eloquently talk about the loss of British life. They were murdered, unarmed soldiers executed. I mean, that's a war crime. But you know, I'm not surprised. This man Saddam Hussein has tortured and brutalized his people for a long, long time. 
We had reports the other day of a dissident who had his tongue cut out and was tied to the stake in the town square, and he bled to death. That's how Saddam Hussein retains power. 
His sons are brutal, brutal people. They're barbaric in nature. So I'm not surprised he's committing crimes against our soldiers. I'm not surprised to hear stories about his thugs killing their own citizens and trying to blame it on coalition forces. I'm not surprised to know that regular army forces are trying to desert but get blown away by fellow Iraqi citizens. I'm not surprised, because the nature of the man who has run the country for a long period of time. 
If he uses weapons of mass destruction, that will just prove our case. And we will deal with it. We've got one objective in mind. That's victory, and we'll achieve victory. 
President Bush. Well, they've been sent a message in this war, too, in that if you launch a weapon of mass destruction, you'll be tried as a war criminal. And I urge those Iraqi generals who have any doubt of our word to be careful, because we'll keep our word. We're going to keep our word to the Iraqi people, and we'll keep our word to those war criminals in Iraq. 

Remarks to National Veterans Organizations
March 28, 2003
The men and women who have worn the Nation's uniform set an example of service and an example of sacrifice for future generations. And the current generation of our military is not letting us down. Today's Armed Forces are upholding the finest traditions of our country and of our military. They are making great progress in the war in Iraq. They are showing great courage, and they are making this country proud.
You're here at a time when our coalition, the United States and our partners, are acting together in a noble purpose. We're out to keep the peace, to make the world more peaceful, to make our Nation and other nations more secure, and we're going to free the people of Iraq from the clutches of Saddam Hussein and his murderous allies. 
We are sending a clear signal to the world that we will not submit to a future in which dictators and terrorists can arm and threaten the peace without consequence. We are enforcing the demands of the United Nations, and we refuse to leave the Iraqi people in slavery under Saddam Hussein. When the war in Iraq is won, all who have joined this cause will be able to say to the Iraqi people, "We were proud to fight for your freedom." 
The regime that once terrorized all of Iraq now controls a small portion of that country. Coalition troops continue their steady advance and are drawing nearer to Baghdad. We're inflicting severe damage on enemy forces. We are now fighting the most desperate units of the dictator's army. The fierce fighting currently underway will demand further courage and further sacrifice. Yet we know the outcome of this battle: The Iraqi regime will be disarmed; the Iraqi regime will be removed from power; Iraq will be free. 
In the last week, we have seen the brutal and cruel nature of a dying regime. In areas still under its control, the regime continues its rule by terror. Prisoners of war have been brutalized and executed. Iraqis who refuse to fight for the regime are being murdered. Some in the Iraqi military have pretended to surrender and then opened fire on coalition forces that were willing to show them mercy. 
Given the nature of this regime, we expect such war crimes, but we will not excuse them. War criminals will be hunted relentlessly and judged severely. 
In the last week, we have also seen the nature of the young men and women who fight on our behalf. Coalition forces have begun delivering food and water to liberated parts of Iraq. I was pleased to hear today that the United Nations Security Council acted to resume food and medical supplies under the existing U.N. program, which will bring urgent relief to millions of Iraqis. 
We care about the human condition of the people who have suffered under Saddam Hussein. We provided $60 million to the World Food Program to help get this humanitarian effort up and running. We're shipping hundreds of thousands of metric tons of food to Iraq. In every possible way, coalition forces are showing kindness and respect to the Iraqi people. They're going to extraordinary lengths to spare the lives of the innocent. We treat wounded Iraqi soldiers. 
The contrast could not be greater between the honorable conduct of our forces and the criminal acts of the enemy. Every Iraqi atrocity has confirmed the justice and the urgency of our cause. Against this enemy we will accept no outcome except complete victory. 
To meet this outcome, we must give our armed services the support and the resources they require. As veterans, all of you understand the importance of a well-supplied and well-trained fighting force. I've asked Congress for a nearly $75 billion wartime supplemental appropriations bill. This funding would provide fuel for ships and aircraft and tanks, supplies for our troops in the theater of operations, new high-tech munitions to replace the ones we have used in this war. The supplemental would also provide funds to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq and to help protect the American homeland in this time of high alert. 

The President's Radio Address
March 29, 2003
Good morning. This week I welcomed Prime Minister Tony Blair to Camp David, where we discussed the progress being made in the war to disarm Iraq, end the dictatorship, and liberate the Iraqi people. Thanks to our fighting forces, the regime that once terrorized all of Iraq now controls a small portion of that country. American and coalition troops have continued a steady advance and are now less than 50 miles from Baghdad. 
In recent days, we have cleared mines from the water and taken control of a key port city, to allow humanitarian aid to begin flowing into the country. We have secured more than 600 oil wells and have begun putting out the few oil-well fires set by the enemy. Our efforts to protect the wealth that belongs to the Iraqi people are paying off. 
And we have prevented the dictator from launching missiles from key sites in western Iraq. We are now fighting the most desperate units of the dictator's army. The fighting is fierce, and we do not know its duration. Yet we know the outcome of this battle: The Iraqi regime will be disarmed and removed from power; Iraq will be free. 
In the last week, the world has seen firsthand the cruel nature of a dying regime. In areas still under its control, the regime continues its rule by terror. Prisoners of war have been brutalized and executed. Iraqis who refuse to fight for the regime are being murdered. An Iraqi woman was hanged for waving at coalition troops. Some in the Iraqi military have pretended to surrender, then opened fire on coalition forces that showed them mercy. 
Given the nature of this regime, we expect such war crimes, but we will not excuse them. War criminals will be hunted relentlessly and judged severely. 
In the last week, the world has also seen the nature of the young men and women who fight on our behalf. They are showing kindness and respect to the Iraqi people. They are going to extraordinary lengths to spare the lives of the innocent. Our forces are delivering food and water to grateful Iraqi citizens in Safwan and Umm Qasr. The contrast could not be greater between the honorable conduct of our liberating force and the criminal acts of the enemy. 
Every atrocity has confirmed the justice and urgency of our cause. Against this enemy, we will accept no outcome but complete and final victory. To meet this objective, we must give our armed services the support and resources they require. I have asked Congress for a nearly $75 billion wartime supplemental appropriations bill. This funding would provide fuel for ships, aircraft, and tanks, supplies for our troops in the theater of operations, and new high-tech munitions to replace the ones we have used in the war. The supplemental would also provide funds to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq and to help protect the American homeland in this time of high alert. I hope the Congress will act quickly to pass this essential measure. 

Remarks at the Port of Philadelphia in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
March 31, 2003
Philadelphia and its port shows the hardworking spirit of this country. It speaks to our economic might. Most importantly, Philadelphia talks about a proud history. After all, it was in this place that we first declared our dedication to liberty. We still believe that all men are created equal and have the right to be free. And that is true for Americans, and that is true for men and women in Iraq.
This is a time of great consequence for our country. Right now, men and women from every part of America, supported by a strong coalition, are fighting to disarm a dangerous regime and to liberate an oppressed people. 
It has been 11 days since the major ground war began. In this short time, our troops have performed brilliantly, with skill and with bravery. They make us proud. In 11 days, coalition forces have taken control of most of western and southern Iraq. In 11 days, we've seized key bridges, opened a northern front, achieved—nearly achieved complete air superiority, and are delivering tons of humanitarian aid. By quick and decisive action, our troops are preventing Saddam Hussein from destroying the Iraqi people's oilfields. Our forces moved into Iraqi missile launch areas that threatened neighboring countries. Many dangers lie ahead, but day by day, we are moving closer to Baghdad. Day by day, we are moving closer to victory. 
Our victory will mean the end of a tyrant who rules by fear and torture. Our victory will remove a sponsor of terror armed with weapons of terror. Our victory will uphold the just demands of the United Nations and the civilized world. And when victory comes, it will be shared by the long-suffering people of Iraq, who deserve freedom and dignity. 
The dictator's regime has ruled by fear and continues to use fear as a tool of domination to the end. Many Iraqis have been ordered to fight or die by Saddam's death squads. Others are pressed into service by threats against their children. Iraqi civilians attempting to flee to liberated areas have been shot and shelled from behind by Saddam's thugs. Schools and hospitals have been used to store military equipment. They serve as bases for military operations. Iraqis who show friendship toward coalition troops are murdered in cold blood by the regime's enforcers. 
The people of Iraq have lived in this nightmare world for more than two decades. It is understandable that fear and distrust run deep. Yet, here in the city where America itself gained freedom, I give this pledge to the citizens of Iraq: We're coming with a mighty force to end the reign of your oppressors. We are coming to bring you food and medicine and a better life. And we are coming, and we will not stop. We will not relent until your country is free. 
In Operation Iraqi Freedom, our Coast Guard is playing a critical role. We have sent many Coast Guard cutters and over 1,000 of our finest active duty and reserve members to the Persian Gulf and surrounding waters. Coast Guard personnel are protecting key ports and Iraqi oil platforms. They're detaining prisoners of war. Members of the Coast Guard are performing their duties with bravery and excellence, and America appreciates your fine service. 
All Americans understand that we face a continuing threat of terrorism. We know that our enemies are desperate. We know that they're dangerous. The dying regime in Iraq may try to bring terror to our shores. Other parts of the global terror network may view this as a moment to strike, thinking that we're distracted. They're wrong. 
We are meeting threats and acting to prevent dangers. The United States and allied troops are shattering the Al Qaida network. We're hunting them down, one at a time. We're finding them. We're interrogating them, and we're bringing them to justice. We will end the Iraqi regime, an ally of terrorist groups and a producer of weapons of mass destruction. 
And here at home, we're acting. Shortly before we began the liberation of Iraq, we launched Operation Liberty Shield to implement additional measures to defend the American homeland against terrorist attacks. 
Third, we've increased surveillance of suspected terrorists. Certain individuals with ties to Iraqi intelligence services have been ordered out of this country. We're interviewing Iraqi-born individuals on a voluntary basis for two reasons, to gain information on possible terrorist plans and to make sure they've not experienced discrimination or hate crimes. This Nation is determined: Iraqi Americans will be protected, and enemy agents will be stopped.
The actions we're taking in Operation Liberty Shield are making this Nation more secure. And the actions we're taking abroad against a terror network and against the regime in Iraq are removing a grave danger to all free nations. In every case, by acting today, we are saving countless lives in the future.

Remarks at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina
April 3, 2003
The President. Thank you all very much. Thank you all so very much for that warm welcome. It's such an honor to be here— especially pleased to be traveling today with a great First Lady, Laura Bush. We really appreciate your welcome, and we're proud to be with the marines and sailors and families of Camp Lejeune. There's no finer sight—no finer sight—than to see 12,000 United States marines and corpsmen, unless you happen to be a member of the Iraqi Republican Guard. 
For more than 60 years, marines have gone forth from Camp Lejeune to fight our country's battles. Now America has entered a fierce struggle to protect the world from a grave danger and to bring freedom to an oppressed people. As the forces of our coalition advance, we learn more about the atrocities of the Iraqi regime and the deep fear that Saddam Hussein has instilled in the Iraqi people. Yet, no scheme of this enemy, no crime of a dying regime will divert us from our mission. We will not stop until Iraq is free. 
On the first day of the campaign, marine units were ordered to secure 600 Iraqi oil wells and prevent environmental disaster, and that mission was accomplished. U.S. marines and our Royal Marine allies were sent in to take the Al Faw Peninsula and clear a path for humanitarian aid, and that job was done. In the tough fighting at Al Nasiriyah, marines continue to push back the enemy and are showing the unrelenting courage worthy of the name Task Force Tarawa. Two nights ago, marines and special operations forces set out on a daring rescue mission, and thanks to their skill and courage, a brave young soldier is now free.
The United States and our allies pledged to act if the dictator did not disarm. The regime in Iraq is now learning that we keep our word. By our actions, we serve a great and just cause: We will remove weapons of mass destruction from the hands of mass murderers. Free nations will not sit and wait, leaving enemies free to plot another September the 11th, this time perhaps with chemical or biological or nuclear terror. And by defending our own security, we are freeing the people of Iraq from one of the cruelest regimes on Earth. 
At this hour, coalition forces are clearing southern cities and towns of the dictator's death squads and enforcers. Our special forces and Army paratroopers, working with Kurdish militia, have opened a northern front against the enemy. Army and Marine divisions are engaging the enemy and advancing to the outskirts of Baghdad. From the skies above, coalition aircraft and cruise missiles are removing hundreds of military targets from Iraq. A vise is closing, and the days of a brutal regime are coming to an end. 
Some servants of the regime have chosen to fill their final days with acts of cowardice and murder. In combat, Saddam's thugs shield themselves with women and children. They have killed Iraqi citizens who welcome coalition troops. They force other Iraqis into battle by threatening to torture or kill their families. They've executed prisoners of war. They've waged attacks under the white flag of truce. They concealed combat forces in civilian neighborhoods and schools and hospitals and mosques. 
In this war, the Iraqi regime is doing— is terrorizing its own citizens, doing everything possible to maximize Iraqi civilian casualties and then to exploit the deaths they've caused for propaganda. These are war criminals, and they will be treated like war criminals. 
In stark contrast, the citizens of Iraq are coming to know what kind of people we have sent to liberate them. American forces and our allies are treating innocent civilians with kindness and showing proper respect to soldiers who surrender. Many Americans have seen the picture of Marine Lance Corporal Marcco Ware carrying a wounded Iraqi soldier on his shoulders to safety for medical treatment. That's the picture of the strength and goodness of the U.S. Marines. That is a picture of America. People in the United States are proud of the honorable conduct of our military, and I'm proud to lead such brave and decent Americans. 
I'm also proud that coalition victories are bringing food and water and medicine to the Iraqi people. Our coalition partners have constructed a pipeline to bring clean water to Umm Qasr. We're delivering emergency rations to the hungry. Right now, ships carrying enough American grain to feed millions are bound for Iraq. We're bringing aid, and we're bringing something more. We're bringing hope. 
A man in one Iraqi village said this to one of our soldiers: "I want my freedom. I don't want food or water. I just want my freedom." America hears that man. We hear all Iraqis who yearn for liberty. And the people of Iraq have my pledge: Our fighting forces will press on until your entire country is free. 
The Iraqi people deserve to live in peace under leaders they have chosen. They deserve a government that respects the rights of every citizen and ethnic group. They deserve a country that is united, that's independent, and that is released from years of sanctions and sorrow. Our coalition has one goal for the future of Iraq, to return that great country to its own people. 
Building a free and prosperous Iraq after the regime is gone will require—will be the work of the Iraqi people for years to come. And they will have our help. Today the goal is to remove the Iraqi regime and to rid Iraq of weapons of mass destruction, and that is the task of the United States military and our coalition. 
Our armed services have performed brilliantly in Operation Iraqi Freedom. Moving a massive force over 200 miles of enemy territory in a matter of days is a superb achievement. Yet there is work ahead for our coalition, for the American Armed Forces, and for the United States Marines. Having traveled hundreds of miles, we will now go the last 200 yards. The course is set. We're on the advance. Our destination is Baghdad, and we will accept nothing less than complete and final victory.

The President's Radio Address
April 5, 2003
Good morning. American and coalition forces are steadily advancing against the regime of Saddam Hussein. With each new village they liberate, our forces are learning more about the atrocities of that regime and the deep fear the dictator has instilled in the Iraqi people. Yet no crime of this dying regime will divert us from our mission. We will not stop until Iraq is free. 
This week, coalition forces have been clearing southern cities and towns of Saddam's death squads and enforcers. Our special forces and Army paratroopers, working with Kurdish militia, have opened a northern front against the enemy. In the town of An Najaf, members of our 101st Airborne Division have been welcomed as liberators. At An Nasiriyah, marines continue to eliminate the enemy while other Army and Marine units have closed in on Baghdad. From the skies above, coalition aircraft and cruise missiles are removing hundreds of military targets from the map. 
As the vise tightens on the Iraqi regime, some of our enemies have chosen to fill their final days with acts of cowardice and murder. In combat, Saddam's thugs shield themselves with women and children. They have killed Iraqi citizens who welcome coalition troops, and they have forced other Iraqis into battle by threatening to torture or kill their families. They have executed prisoners of war, waged attacks under the white flag of truce, and concealed combat forces in civilian neighborhoods, schools, hospitals, and mosques. In this war, the Iraqi regime is terrorizing its own citizens, doing everything possible to maximize Iraqi civilian casualties and then to exploit the deaths they have caused for propaganda. These are war criminals, and they'll be treated as war criminals. 
In stark contrast, the citizens of Iraq are coming to know what kind of people we have sent to liberate them. American forces and our allies are treating innocent civilians with kindness and showing proper respect to the soldiers who surrender. The people of the United States are proud of the honorable conduct of our military. And I am proud to lead such brave and decent Americans. 
In recent days, we have also brought food and water and medicine to the Iraqi people. We're delivering emergency rations to the hungry. Right now, cargo ships are bound for Iraq, carrying wheat from Oklahoma, Kansas, and Texas—enough to feed 4.5 million Iraqis for 1 month. Additional food, supplied by the World Food Program, is moving by truck convoy across the Turkish border into northern Iraq. 
We are bringing aid to the long-suffering people of Iraq, and we are bringing something more. We are bringing hope. One Iraqi, when the coalition troops arrived, described the emotions of his village. "They were waiting for you," he said, "and all the people believe that America and Britain have come to liberate them, not to conquer." 
Village by village, city by city, liberation is coming. The people of Iraq have my pledge: Our fighting forces will press on until their oppressors are gone and their whole country is free. 
By our actions in this war, we serve a great and just cause. Free nations will not sit and wait, leaving enemies free to plot another September the 11th—this time perhaps with chemical, biological, or nuclear terror. We'll remove weapons of mass destruction from the hands of mass murderers. And by defending our own security, we are ridding the people of Iraq from one of the cruelest regimes on Earth. The United States and our allies pledged to act if the dictator did not disarm. The regime in Iraq is now learning that we keep our word. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom in Hillsborough, Northern Ireland
April 8, 2003
America and Britain have been partners in Afghanistan, where a terrorist regime has been replaced by a government committed to justice and to peace. At this moment, our military forces are fighting side by side in Iraq to defend our security and to free that nation from oppression. Our Governments are working to help bring about a settlement in the Middle East that protects the rights of Israelis and Palestinians, that promotes the peace, that promotes security, that promotes human dignity.
Prime Minister Blair and I are also reviewing the course of the battle in Iraq. We're spending a lot of time talking about that country's future beyond war and beyond tyranny. As the Prime Minister mentioned, our armed services are conducting themselves with great courage and, at the same time, great humanity. I'm proud of our forces. I'm proud of the British forces. We're both proud of the Australian forces. 
We share sacrifices. We share grief. We pray for those families who mourn the loss of life, American families, British families. And as this war has progressed, the world has witnessed the brutal desperation, the true character of the Iraqi regime. The world is also witnessing the liberation and humanitarian aid our coalition is bringing to that country as a new day begins in Iraq. 
In fighting this war, we're taking every precaution to protect innocent life. We're showing respect for the Iraqi people, respect for their culture. There will be difficult fighting ahead, yet the outcome is not in doubt: Iraq will be free. 
After the current regime is removed, our coalition will work to restore electricity and water supplies, medical care, and other essential services in Iraq. We'll move as quickly as possible to place governmental responsibilities under the control of an Interim Authority composed of Iraqis from both inside and outside the country. The Interim Authority will serve until a permanent government can be chosen by the Iraqi people. 
The rebuilding of Iraq will require the support and expertise of the international community. We're committed to working with international institutions, including the United Nations, which will have a vital role to play in this task. 
This work when the war is finished will not be easy, but we're going to see it through. A free Iraq will be ruled by laws, not by a dictator. A free Iraq will be peaceful and not a friend to terrorists or a menace to its neighbors. A free Iraq will give up all its weapons of mass destruction. A free Iraq will set itself on the path to democracy. The end of Saddam's regime will also remove a source of violence and instability in the Middle East. 
President Bush. You know, I don't know whether he survived. The only thing I know is he's losing power. I know that because the Royal Marines in Basra worked so hard that the people of Basra are beginning to understand that—a couple of things: One, when we said we would come and stay to achieve their liberty, we meant it; that in Basra, for example, the Royal Marine— the presence of the Royal Marines is providing enough comfort for people to begin to express their own opinions. They're beginning to realize freedom is real. 
These are people in the south of Iraq that had been betrayed, tortured, had been told they were going to be free, took a risk in the past, and then were absolutely hammered by the Iraqi regime. They were skeptical. They were cynical. They were doubtful. Now they believe. They're beginning to understand we're real and true, and it's happening elsewhere. Freedom is spreading south to north. 
So the only thing I can tell you is, is that that grip I used to describe that Saddam had around the throats of the Iraqi people are loosening. I can't tell you if all 10 fingers are off the throat, but finger by finger, it's coming off. And the people are beginning to realize that. It's important for the Iraqi people to continue to hear this message: We will not stop until they are free; Saddam Hussein will be gone. It might have been yesterday. I don't know. But he'll be gone, and they just need to know that, because we're not leaving. And not only that, they need to hear the message that we're not leaving after he's gone until they are ready to run their own government. 
I hear a lot of talk here about how we're going to impose this leader or that leader. Forget it. From day one, we have said the Iraqi people are capable of running their own country. That's what we believe. The position of the United States of America is, the Iraqis are plenty capable of running Iraq, and that's precisely what is going to happen. 
President Bush. Yes. I mean, when we say "vital role for the United Nations," we mean vital role for the United Nations in all aspects of the issue, whether it be humanitarian aid or whether it be helping to stand up a Interim Authority. The Iraqi people will decide who's on the Iraqi— the Interim Authority. The Interim Authority is a transition quasi-government until the real Government shows up, until the conditions are right for the people to elect their own leadership. And the United Nations will have a vital role. 
When we say "vital role," that's precisely what we mean, that they will be involved, along with the coalition, in helping to stand up an Interim Authority. But the Iraqi people are responsible for who's on that Authority. And Tony can describe what's happening in Basra. He might describe some of the meetings that are taking place as leadership begins to emerge. 
It is a cynical world that says it's impossible for the Iraqis to run themselves. It is a cynical world which condemns Iraq to failure. We refuse to accept that. We believe that the Iraqi people are capable, talented, and will be successful in running their own Government. 
President Bush. Well, I view a vital role as a agent to help people live freely. That's a vital role. That means food; that means medicine; that means aid; that means a place where people can give their contributions; that means suggesting people for the IIA; that means being a party to the progress being made in Iraq. That's what that means. And I want to thank Kofi Annan for naming a personal representative to the process yesterday. It is a positive step. 
We have said all along there needs to be a role for the United Nations. We said so in the Azores. We will keep repeating it. And evidently there's some skepticism here in Europe about whether or not I mean what I say. Saddam Hussein clearly now knows I mean what I say. And when, you know, we—and people in Iraq will know we mean what we say when we talk about freedom. And a vital role for the United Nations means a vital role for the United Nations. 

Videotaped Remarks to the Iraqi People
April 10, 2003
This is George W. Bush, the President of the United States. At this moment, the regime of Saddam Hussein is being removed from power, and a long era of fear and cruelty is ending. American and coalition forces are now operating inside Baghdad, and we will not stop until Saddam's corrupt gang is gone. The Government of Iraq and the future of your country will soon belong to you. 
The goals of our coalition are clear and limited. We will end a brutal regime, whose aggression and weapons of mass destruction make it a unique threat to the world. Coalition forces will help maintain law and order so that Iraqis can live in security. We will respect your great religious traditions, whose principles of equality and compassion are essential to Iraq's future. We will help you build a peaceful and representative government that protects the rights of all citizens. And then our military forces will leave. Iraq will go forward as a unified, independent, and sovereign nation that has regained a respected place in the world. 
The United States and its coalition partners respect the people of Iraq. We are taking unprecedented measures to spare the lives of innocent Iraqi citizens. We are beginning to deliver food and water and medicine to those in need. Our only enemy is Saddam and his brutal regime, and that regime is your enemy as well. 
In the new era that is coming to Iraq, your country will no longer be held captive to the will of a cruel dictator. You will be free—free to build a better life instead of building more palaces for Saddam and his sons, free to pursue economic prosperity without the hardship of economic sanctions, free to travel and free to speak your mind, free to join in the political affairs of Iraq. And all the people who make up your country—Kurds, Shi'a, Turkomans, Sunnis, and others—will be free of the terrible persecution that so many have endured. 
The nightmare that Saddam Hussein has brought to your nation will soon be over. You are a good and gifted people, the heirs of a great civilization that contributes to all humanity. You deserve better than tyranny and corruption and torture chambers. You deserve to live as free people. And I assure every citizen of Iraq: Your nation will soon be free. 

Remarks Following a Visit With Troops Wounded in Operation Iraqi Freedom and an Exchange With Reporters in Bethesda, Maryland
April 11, 2003
The President. Laura and I just had an extraordinary experience here at Bethesda and at—initially at Walter Reed, to thank our troops who've been overseas in Iraq for their dedication and courage and their service to the country. Because of troops like them, because of coalition troops, we've had an historic week. 
I don't think I'll ever forget—I'm sure a lot of other people will never forget— the statue of Saddam Hussein falling in Baghdad, and then seeing the jubilation on the faces of ordinary Iraqis as they realized that the grip of fear that had them by the throat had been released—the first signs of freedom. 
The President. The priority of this campaign is to rid the Iraqi people of any vestiges of Saddam Hussein and his regime so we can not only free the people but clear that country of weapons of mass destruction. I don't know the whereabouts of Saddam Hussein. I don't know if he's dead or alive. I do know he's no longer in power. 
In terms of POWs, we will use every resource we have to find any POWs that are alive. And we pray that they are alive, because if they are, we'll find them. 
The President. I don't take anything personally. I committed our troops because I believe that Saddam Hussein and his regime posed a threat to the American people, posed a threat to anybody who loves freedom. We will achieve that objective. And at the same time, we will free the Iraqi people. And that's an important objective as well. We believe in freedom. We believe freedom is universal. We believe freedom is a gift from the Almighty God for every person, regardless of their race or their religion. 
This war will end when our commanders in the field tell me that the objective has been achieved. And Tommy Franks put together a great strategy. The wonderful thing about free speech and a lot of TV stations is you get a lot of opinions. Some of them were right, and some of them were really wrong. But that's okay. That's what we—that's what we believe. We believe in free speech. We believe people ought to be able to express their opinion. 
The President. The specific thing I want to hear is that our commanders say we've achieved the clear objective I set out. And that's when we will say this is over. This is a campaign that has been run on the frontlines by General Tommy Franks. And that's the way it's going to continue to be, that Tommy gets the—Tommy tells us what is necessary to achieve the objective. We gave Tommy the tools necessary to win. We agreed with his strategy, and he's running this war. And when Tommy says we've achieved our objective, that's when we've achieved our objective. I'm here in Washington, DC. He's there in Qatar, and he's got commanders in Baghdad. He's better to judge whether we've achieved the objective than I have. 
The President. The war will end when Tommy Franks says we've achieved our objective. 
The President. That's a very speculative question about foreign priority. My priority right now is to win the war on terror. And that means we've got ongoing operations in Afghanistan. The Iraqi theater was a part of the war on terror, and we continue to fight the war on terror. So that's a major priority.
The President. It's good. The Marines are a tough group—a tough group—as you know. And a lot of the troops wanted to get healed quickly so they could go back with their units. It's an amazing thing when you see a person wounded, sitting there in a wheelchair or bound up in bandages or these different looking metal things sticking out of them to hold them together—a young man look you in the eye and say, "I can't wait to get back to my unit. I hope I'm healed fast enough to get back to Iraq." 
I reminded them and their families that the war in Iraq is—it's really about peace, trying to make the world more peaceful. This victory in Iraq, when it happens, will make the world more peaceful. I reminded them that their sacrifices really had to do with the security of our country, that Saddam Hussein and his terrorist allies are threats to America, threats to our people because of what we believe in. 
I also reminded them that their courageous sacrifice will help young Iraqis grow up in a free society, that out of the chaos that takes place there now and after the fear of a Saddam Hussein and his thugs, that the Iraqi people will run their own country, make their own decisions, choose their own leaders, and will become a country at peace with others in the neighborhood. 

The President's Radio Address
April 12, 2003
Good morning. Over the last several days, the world has watched as the regime of Saddam Hussein began passing into history. We will always remember the first images of a nation released from decades of tyranny and fear. The conflict continues in Iraq, and our military may still face hard fighting. Yet the statues of the dictator and all the works of his terror regime are falling away. 
From the beginning and to this very hour, members of the American and coalition forces have conducted themselves with all the skill and honor we expect of them. Our enemies have seen their valor. The people of Iraq are seeing their compassion as our military provides food, water, and medical treatment to all in need, including captured Iraqi soldiers. As Army Master Sergeant Howard Kutcher of Delaware said of his service in the Middle East, "I am not here to conquer. I am here to help." 
In one city, American soldiers encountered a crowd of Iraqi citizens who thought our troops were about to storm a nearby mosque. Just then, Lieutenant Colonel Chris Hughes ordered his men to get down on one knee and point their weapons to the ground. This gesture of respect helped defuse a dangerous situation and made our peaceful intentions clear. 
Coalition forces have also come upon scenes that explain why fear runs so deep among the Iraqi people. In Baghdad on Tuesday, U.S. marines helped to free more than 100 children who, according to one report, had been jailed for refusing to join the dictator's Ba'ath Party youth organization. Malnourished and wearing rags, the children were overjoyed to see their parents and our liberating forces. In the words of Lieutenant Colonel Fred Padilla, commander of the 1st Battalion 5th Marines, "The children just streamed out of the gates, and their parents just started to embrace us." "Hundreds of kids," he said, "were swarming us and kissing us." 
As Saddam's regime of fear is brought to an end, the people of Iraq are revealing the true hopes they have always held. It should surprise no one that Iraqis, like all people, resent oppression and welcome their own freedom. It should surprise no one that in every nation and every culture, the human heart desires the same good things, dignity, liberty, and a chance to build a better life. 
As people throughout Iraq celebrate the arrival of freedom, America celebrates with them. We know that freedom is the gift of God to all mankind, and we rejoice when others can share it. 
On Wednesday in central Baghdad, one of the Iraqi men who took a sledgehammer to the pedestal of the giant statue of Saddam had this to say: "I'm 49, but I never lived a single day. Only now will I start living." 
Millions of Iraqis feel the same as their country is finally returned to them. The nightmare of Saddam Hussein's rule in Iraq is ending. Soon, the good and gifted people of Iraq will be free to choose their leaders who respect their rights and reflect their character. In all that is to come, they will have the good will of the entire world. And they will have the friendship of the people of the United States. 

Remarks on the Rescue of U.S. Prisoners of War and an Exchange With Reporters
April 13, 2003
We still have missing in action in Iraq; we will continue to look for them. We pray that they too will be safe and free one of these days. But it's just a good way to start off the morning, to have been notified that seven of our fellow Americans are going to be home here pretty soon, in the arms of their loved ones.
The President. Yes. You know, it's amazing, the statue comes down on Wednesday and the headlines start to read, "Oh, there's disorder." Well, no kidding. It is a situation that is chaotic because Saddam Hussein created the conditions for chaos. He created conditions of fear and hatred, and it's going to take a while to stabilize the country. 
But just like the military campaign was second-guessed—I'm sure the plan is being second—but we will be successful. And there will be—— 
The President. Let me finish, please. There will be more stability. There will be more medicine. There will be more food delivered over time, and it's happening as I speak. 
The President. You're free, and freedom is beautiful. And you know, it'll take time to restore chaos and order—order out of chaos. But we will. 
The President. I think that we believe there are chemical weapons in Syria, for example. And we will—each situation will require a different response, and of course, we're—first things first. We're here in Iraq now. And the second thing about Syria is, is that we expect cooperation, and I'm hopeful we'll receive cooperation. 

Videotaped Remarks to America's Military and Their Families
April 14, 2003
Over the last few weeks, the world has witnessed what you already know, that our Armed Forces act with great skill and great courage and great humanity. Images of the Iraqi people welcoming our troops in cities across that country are a testament to the character of our men and women in uniform.

Remarks Following a Discussion With Business Leaders
April 15, 2003
I want to welcome you all to the Rose Garden. It is a beautiful day. It's a beautiful day for our country too. We've got troops still fighting in Iraq, and our Nation takes great pride in the men and women who wear our country's uniform and who sacrifice for security and peace. The world has seen their skill and their courage and their humanity. They bring security to our country and, at the same time, bring freedom to the Iraqi people
This Government is acting to protect the American people from the threats of a new era. In Iraq, the regime of Saddam Hussein is no more. A month ago—one month ago—that country was a prison to its people, a haven for terrorists, an arsenal of weapons that endangered the world. Today, the world is safer. The terrorists have lost an ally. The Iraqi people are regaining control of their own destiny. These are good days in the history of freedom. 
Our victory in Iraq is certain, but it is not complete. Centralized power of the dictator has ended. Yet, in parts of Iraq, desperate and dangerous elements remain. Forces of our coalition will engage these enemies until they surrender or until they're destroyed. We have waged this war with determination and with clarity of purpose, and we will see it through until the job is done. 
As we press on to liberate every corner of Iraq, we are beginning the difficult work of helping Iraqis to build a free and stable country. The immediate tasks involve establishing order as well as delivering food and water and medicines. We'll help Iraqis to restore electrical power and other basic services. We'll help destroy the former regime's weapons of mass destruction. We'll help the Iraqi people to establish a just and representative government which respects human rights and adheres to the rule of law. These tasks will take effort, and these tasks will take time. But I have faith in the Iraqi people, and I believe that a free Iraq can be an example of reform and progress to all the Middle East. 
Our victory in Iraq will be a crucial advance in the war against terror. Yet, the war on terror continues. Our Nation is still threatened by determined and resourceful enemies. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction remains a danger to the civilized world. Yet from the very day our country was attacked, we have sent a clear message to all who would threaten us and our friends and our allies: The United States of America and our coalition will defend ourselves. When we make a pledge, we mean it. We keep our word, and what we begin, we will finish. 

Remarks to Employees at the Boeing F-18 Production Facility in St. Louis, Missouri
April 16, 2003
And the other big task for this Nation is to overcome any threats to our country, wherever they gather. Each of you has had a part of preparing this Nation to meet the dangers of our time. Today, half a world away, America is leading this great coalition of free nations to end a brutal regime and to remove a threat to our society. We've applied the new powers of technology—like the F-18s—to strike an enemy force with speed and incredible precision. Our work is not done. The difficulties have not passed, but the regime of Saddam Hussein has passed into history. Thanks to the courage and the might of our military, the American people are more secure. Thanks to the courage and might of our military, the Iraqi people are now free.
You and I and all the world are witnessing historic days in the cause of freedom. One month ago—just one month ago—the forces of our coalition stood at the borders of Iraq with orders to advance hundreds of miles through hostile territory against a ruthless enemy. Today, organized military resistance has virtually ended; the major cities of Iraq have been liberated. 
Two weeks ago, the Iraqi regime operated a gulag for dissidents and, incredibly enough, a prison for young children. Now the gates to that prison have been thrown wide open, and we are putting the dictator's political prisons and torture chambers out of business. 
One week ago, Baghdad was filled with statues and giant pictures of the dictator. They're kind of hard to find today. [Laughter] The fall of that statue in Baghdad marked the end of a nightmare for the Iraqi people, and it marked the start of a new day of freedom. 
Four days ago, seven American soldiers, six men and one woman, were held captive by forces still loyal to the fallen regime. Today, those brave Americans are with their fellow comrades and are headed home to their loved ones. 
American and coalition forces still face serious risks in Iraq. Scattered enemy is still capable of doing harm to our forces and to the innocent. But we'll stay focused. We will finish what we've begun. We will press on until our mission is finished and victory is complete. 
In Afghanistan, we and our allies ended the rule of the Taliban and closed down camps where terrorists plotted and trained to attack us. In Iraq, our coalition has now removed an ally of terrorists and a producer of weapons of mass destruction. In other nations, we're hunting and capturing members of Al Qaida, disrupting their plans before they can strike. Across the world, terrorists and tyrants are learning this, that America and our friends and our allies will act in our own defense. Instead of drifting toward tragedy, we will protect our security, and we will promote the peace in the world
From Kabul to Baghdad, American forces and our fine allies have conducted some of the most successful military campaigns in history. By a combination of creative strategies and advanced technologies, we are redefining war on our terms. Even before the fighting began in Iraq, Special Operations forces were inside the country, moving in to protect key infrastructure, protect the oilfields owned by the Iraqi people, to secure vital bridges. Overwhelmingly yet carefully targeted airstrikes left entire enemy divisions without armor and without organization. Precision-guided weapons fatally disrupted the regime's system of command and control. 
Every armed conflict brings sacrifice and grief. That's why the use of our military is our last option. Yet, more than ever before, the precision of our technology is protecting the lives of our soldiers and the lives of innocent civilians. The overwhelming majority of the munitions dropped in the Iraqi campaign were precision-guided. In this new era of warfare, we can target a regime, not a nation. Our aim is to track and strike the guilty. Terrorists and tyrants have now been put on notice; they can no longer feel safe hiding behind innocent lives. 
Our military is strong and our military is ready, and we intend to keep it that way. Our Armed Forces must have every resource they need to carry out and complete the missions we give them. This morning at the White House, I signed a $79 billion wartime supplemental to cover the needs directly arising from Operation Iraqi Freedom and the reconstruction of Iraq. People who serve in the military are giving their best to America, and I want to thank the Members of Congress for acting quickly to give our men and women in arms the support they need. 
The character of our military reflects the character of our country. America uses its might in the service of principle. As we defend our security, we value the lives and the liberty of the Iraqi people. Having rid Iraq of an oppressive regime, we arecommitted to helping Iraq build a future of freedom and dignity and peace. 
By swift and effective military action, we avoided the massive flow of refugees that many had expected. By delivering food and water and medicine to the Iraqi people, even as coalition units engaged the enemy, we have helped to avert a humanitarian crisis. Emergency supplies are now moving freely to Iraq from many countries. Now that Iraq is liberated, the United Nations should lift economic sanctions on that country. 
We're also addressing Iraq's urgent medical problems, problems left by a regime that built palaces in a country that needed hospitals. Right now, hundreds of Iraqis are being treated at U.S. and British military facilities. Governments from Europe and the Middle East are moving field hospitals to Iraq. Coalition members and the United Nations and other international organizations are sending much-needed medical supplies. The Red Cross is working to keep water and electricity flowing to hospitals. And very soon our coalition will be making direct emergency payments to Iraqi doctors and nurses who will be providing desperately needed care to their fellow citizens. With all the hardships of this transition, the lives of the Iraqi people will be better than anything they have known for generations. 
The journey from a totalitarian, brutal dictatorship to a free society is not easy. It will take time to build the institutions of democracy and the habits of freedom. Today, civil order is being restored in communities throughout Iraq, and Iraqis themselves are helping in the effort. Iraqis are leading coalition forces to caches of weapons and volunteering for citizen patrols to provide security. In Basra, British forces and Iraqis have formed joint patrols to maintain order. Just days after the fall of the dictator, just days after the people of Iraq realized they were free from the clutches of his terror, the Iraqi people are reclaiming their own streets, their own country, and their own future. 
Yesterday an historic gathering occurred in the city of An Nasiriyah, where Iraqis met openly and freely to discuss the future of the country. They even had some protesters outside the meeting, a sure sign of freedom. [Laughter] Many more of these meetings will take place in the weeks and months to come. In An Nasiriyah, the Iraqi people have made a good start. And out of that meeting came this declaration: Iraq must be democratic. And the nations of our coalition share that commitment. We also share this commitment: We will not impose any form of government on Iraq. We will help Iraq to build a government of, by, and for the Iraqi people. 
In Iraq, the world is witnessing something dramatic and something important. We're seeing the deep and universal desire of men and women to live in freedom. As Americans, this shouldn't surprise us. We believe that no force, no threat, can make human beings love tyranny. We believe that the appeal of liberty will, in time, overcome any coercive power on Earth. We believe that people across the Middle East and across the world are weary of poverty, weary of oppression, and yearn to be free. And all who know that hope, all who will work and sacrifice for freedom, have a friend in the United States of America

The President's Radio Address
April 19, 2003
This year, Easter and Passover have special meaning for the families of our men and women in uniform who feel so intensely the absence of their loved ones during these days. More than 250,000 American troops are serving in Operation Iraqi Freedom to protect our security and to free an oppressed people. Their families await their safe return, and our grateful Nation remembers them in prayer. 
Our whole Nation has also shared in the happiness of learning that seven American prisoners of war were rescued in northern Iraq earlier this week and are now safe. Thanks to the courage of our marines and the help of Iraqis, their families have even more reason to celebrate this weekend. 

Remarks and an Exchange With Reporters at Fort Hood, Texas
April 20, 2003
The President. We just had a great church service. Like thousands of our fellow citizens, we celebrated Easter. We celebrated with our family, but we also celebrated with members of the 4th Infantry Division military families. The 4th Infantry Division is in Iraq.
The President. When Tommy Franks says it's complete. I'll tell you this, though, the liberation of Iraq will make the world more peaceful. 
The President. I'm not worried. Freedom is beautiful, and when people are free, they express their opinions. You know, they couldn't express their opinions before we came; now they can. I've always said democracy is going to be hard. It's not easy to go from being enslaved to being free. But it's going to happen, because the basic instincts of mankind is to be free. They want to be free. And so, sure, there's going to be people expressing their opinions, and we welcome that, just like here in America people can express their opinion. 
The President. That Saddam Hussein is no longer in power. That's for certain. He was in power, and now he is not. And therefore, the Iraqi people's lives will be much better off. But other than that, I don't—Stretch, we'll just have to see. 
The President. If he is alive, I would suggest he not pop his head up. 

Remarks to Employees at the Army Tank Plant in Lima, Ohio
April 24, 2003
In the liberation of Iraq, we've applied powerful weapons, like the tank you build here, to strike our enemy with speed and precision. In the use of the Abrams tank, we have got a vehicle that is the most safe vehicle for our fighting personnel, precise enough to protect innocent life. 
Work is not done. There's still dangers and challenges to remain. But one thing is certain: Saddam Hussein is no longer in power. And thanks to the courage and might of our military, America is more secure today. And thanks to the courage and might of our military, the Iraqi people are free. 
You see, it's a chance for me to remind the people of this country that we're witnessing historic days in the cause of freedom. This is an historic moment. Just over a month ago, not all that long ago, a cruel dictator ruled a country, ruled Iraq by torture and fear. His regime was allied with terrorists, and the regime was armed with weapons of mass destruction. Today, that regime is no more. 
We have applied our might in the name of peace and in the name of freedom. That's why we applied our might. We gave our word that the threat from Iraq would be ended. And with the support of allies and because of the bravery of our Armed Forces, we have kept our word. 
Last year, one of the first preparations for possible war, one of the first parts of our planning for war, came when General Tommy Franks—from Midland, Texas, I want you to know—went to the same high school as First Lady Laura Bush did—who, by the way, sends her love and her best. Tommy Franks asked—one of the first requests in preparation for possible war was that we send 1,200 Abrams tanks to the theater. That was one of the first decisions that Tommy made. And when the war came, in the initial stages of that war, units equipped with Abrams tanks and Bradley fighting vehicles led the charge, were first in as we crossed into Iraq to free the people of that country. 
When our coalition met fierce resistance in An Nasiriyah and on the way up, south to north, our armored forces answered decisively. The tanks built right here in Lima, Ohio, charged through elements of the dictator's Republican Guards, led the forces of a liberation into the heart of Iraq, and rolled all the way into downtown Baghdad. Throughout the campaign, our enemy learned that when Abrams tanks are on the battlefield, America means business. 
Our edge in warfare comes, in part, from the American spirit of enterprise—no question about that—from great companies and great workers like you all. During the fighting in Iraq, tank commanders sent word that they needed better ways to protect the Abrams exhaust systems from enemy fire. During the battle, word came back from Iraq, right here to Lima. And so engineers and machinists, pipefitters and welders and packers and transportation specialists of this plant went straight to work. Within a week, you had a new part designed and manufactured, and the first kits to deal with that problem shipped to Iraq. When our soldiers and marines needed you most, when the pressure was on, you came through, and America is grateful. 
I understand that one welder here, Mark Springer, had a especially strong interest in completing the project, to making sure the Abrams were able to fulfill their mission. You see, his son Joshua is serving in Iraq as an Abrams tank commander. I thank Mark for his service. And the next time, Mark, you communicate with Josh, you tell him the Commander in Chief came to Lima to say how proud I am of his service and the others' service to our country. 
The mission is not complete. Our forces still face danger in Iraq. Our enemy is scattered, but they're still capable of doing harm. But we're not going to lose our focus. We're going to press on until the mission is complete. 
In any conflict, America's greatest single asset is the character of the men and women who wear our uniform. In Iraq, they have shown us once again that powerful weapons are a great advantage in modern warfare, but courage is still decisive. Some of the bravest have been lost to us and to their families. Some of the best have not returned home, and we will never forget their sacrifice. 
In Iraq, we are defending this Nation's security. After the attacks of September the 11th, 2001, we will notallow grave threats to go unopposed. We are now working to locate and destroy Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. 
Iraqis with firsthand knowledge of these programs, including several top officials who have come forward recently, some voluntarily—[laughter]—others not—[laughter]—are beginning to cooperate, are beginning to let us know what the facts were on the ground. And that's important because the regime of Saddam Hussein spent years hiding and disguising his weapons. He tried to fool the United Nations, and did for 12 years, by hiding these weapons. And so it's going to take time to find them. But we know he had them. And whether he destroyed them, moved them, or hid them, we're going to find out the truth. And one thing is for certain: Saddam Hussein no longer threatens America with weapons of mass destruction. 
We're not only in Iraq to protect our security; we're also showing that we value the lives and the liberty of the Iraqi people. We're pressing forward with the critical work of relief and reconstruction in that country. And the work will be difficult. You see, Iraq is recovering not just from weeks of conflict but from decades of totalitarian rule. The dictator built palaces in a country that needed hospitals. He spent money on illegal weapons, not on the education of the Iraqi children or food for the Iraqi people. Statues of the man have been pulled down, but the fear and suspicion he instilled in the people will take longer to pass away. 
Yet I have faith in the Iraqi people. They have the resources, the talent, and the desire to live in peace and freedom. And in the hard work of building a free Iraq, they will have a consistent friend in the United States of America. 
We have sent teams of people over to Iraq to make sure that they have adequate food. We're restoring electricity. We're making sure the hospitals are full of medicine and staffed with people to help the people of that country. 
I've sent a good man to help the Iraqi people, retired General Jay Garner—sent him to Iraq, and he arrived in Baghdad just this week. You see, it wasn't all that long ago that our tanks were in Baghdad. It may seem like a lot of time—there's a lot on our TV screens—but it wasn't all that long ago that the people got the first whiff of freedom. And now we've followed up with a team of people, headed by this man Garner who's got one overriding goal, to leave a free nation in the hands of a free people. That is our goal in Iraq. 
Our mission—besides removing the regime that threatened us, besides ending a place where the terrorists could find a friend, besides getting rid of weapons of mass destruction—our mission has been to bring a humanitarian aid and restore basic services and put this country Iraq on the road to self-government. And we'll stay as long as it takes to complete our mission. And then all our forces are going to leave Iraq and come home. 
And we're making progress. There's tangible, visible progress on the ground there in Iraq. Step by step, the citizens of that country are reclaiming their own country. They're identifying former officials who are guilty of crimes. That deck of cards seems to be getting complete over time. [Laughter] They're volunteering for citizens patrols to provide security in the cities. They're beginning to understand that they need to step up and be responsible citizens if they want to live in peace and a free society. 
Many Iraqis are now reviving religious rituals which were forbidden by the old regime. See, a free society honors religion. A free society is a society which believes in the freedom of religion. And many Iraqis are now speaking their mind in public. That's a good sign. [Laughter] That means a new day has come in Iraq. When Saddam was the dictator and you spoke your mind, he would cut out your tongue and leave you to bleed to death in a town square. No fooling. That's how he dealt with dissidents. 
Today in Iraq, there's discussion, debate, protest, all the hallmarks of liberty. [Laughter] The path to freedom may not always be neat and orderly, but it is the right of every person and every nation. This country believes that freedom is God's gift to every individual on the face of the Earth. 
Last week there was an historic gathering that occurred in the city of Al Nasiriyah, where Iraqis met openly and freely to discuss the future of their country. And out of that meeting came this declaration by the Iraqis that were there: Iraq must be democratic. And that's the goal, the commitment of the United States and our coalition partners: Iraq must be democratic. And as new Iraqi leaders begin to emerge, we'll work with them. One thing is certain: We will not impose a government on Iraq. We will help that nation build a government of, by, and for the Iraqi people. 

Interview With Tom Brokaw of NBC News
April 24, 2003
then gave the instructions to Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld that Operation Iraqi Freedom would commence at a time of Tommy Franks' choosing, told Tommy, you know, for the sake of peace and security and the freedom of the Iraqi people that he's got the orders to proceed. I asked God's blessing on him and the troops. He saluted. I saluted back and left the room. 
It was a—it was an emotional moment for me because I had obviously made up my mind that if we needed to, we would use troops to get rid of weapons of mass destruction to free the Iraqi people. But the actual moment of making that decision was a heavy moment. I then went outside and walked around the grounds, just to get a little air and collect my thoughts. 
And I thought I was pretty well through with the day until 3:40 that afternoon, when I got a call from Secretary Rumsfeld that said, "Mr. President, the plans have changed." He said, "I would like to change the plans. I need your permission to change the plans. Can I come over?" He didn't say the plans had changed, but I knew what he'd told me on the phone, it would mean the plans would have changed. And that is, we had a shot at Saddam Hussein, they thought. 
So I assembled the national security team of the Vice President, Colin Powell, Rumsfeld, Myers, CIA Tenet, Condi Rice, Andy Card, and some other CIA agents there— some guys I hadn't seen before came in the Oval. And the reason why they were there is they had a source on the ground that was convinced that not only would Saddam Hussein be in the complex, but Uday and Qusay, his two sons, would be there as well. And they explained why this was the case. And basically they were asking permission from me to launch an air-strike. 
I was hesitant at first, to be frank with you, because I was worried that the first pictures coming out of Iraq would be a wounded grandchild of Saddam Hussein— but Saddam Hussein, who was not there at the time we started making the decision, would never show up—that the first images of the American attack would be death to young children. 
And this is an interesting moment, because as time went on during the day, that evening, the intelligence got richer and richer. In other words, the guy on the ground was calling in to the CENTCOM headquarters, who was immediately calling in to the White House—more and more information. For example, he discovered that there was a bunker 100 feet away from one of the houses, a bunker that had so much concrete and was likely to house Saddam when he arrived and his kids, his boys. 
And as the intelligence got richer, I got more confidence with the notion that Saddam would, in fact, be there. And at 7:15 that evening, I gave the order for Tommy to proceed with an attack on the farms, but changed—they had an ordnance package of 30 cruise missiles. But because of the bunker, they had to change the timing of the attack so that the stealth bomber went in first, unloaded his ordnance, and then the TLAMs or the cruise missiles would follow in behind, which means they had to reprogram all these missiles. And they didn't have much time to do it because the flight time of the missiles from their particular launch sites was about 2 hours. 
This other thing that bothered me during the decisionmaking was that the stealth would go in unescorted. There would have been no air suppression on enemy defenses prior to him going in, in order to keep the element of surprise alive. So the day changed, and it was a dramatic several hours because we really changed the battle plan
The President. Yes, I did. I did. Actually, they began to hit, and then I went in and shortly thereafter addressed the Nation— so I was getting makeup and talking about the—you know, figuring out the words in the speech. I did. And it was about 9:30 p.m., as I recall, and then I spoke to the country about 10:15 p.m. 
But what was interesting, Tom—I don't think many people know this—is that the game plan was to move Special Ops forces early, at noon that day. And we would have explained to the country, as kind of creating the conditions for the battlefield, so that when our troops moved significantly, their conditions would be ripe for success. 
At Friday, at noon, I was going to address the Nation about the air campaign, and the ground campaign would follow shortly thereafter. Turns out that because we conducted the air raid, I had to speak that night to the country. And then Tommy said he was going to move the ground force movement up early to secure oilfields and to move as quickly as possible into Iraq, which really says that he had the ability and the authority and the flexibility necessary to change a war plan to meet the needs on the ground. 
The President. We did. 
The President. He felt like we got Saddam. 
The President. He felt like that, yes. And we're trying, of course, to verify. And before there's any declaration, of course, there will be a lot of evidence. 
The President. Well, yes. I was amused by that, almost as amused by that as I was his PR man—it was one of the classics—probably helping NBC Saturday Night Live out mightily, but through his— it was just unbelievable what he was saying. 
But you know, the people that wonder if Saddam Hussein is dead or not, there's some evidence that says that he—suggests he might be. We would never make that declaration until we were more certain. But the person that helped direct the attacks believes that Saddam, at the very minimum, was severely wounded. 
The President. That night, yes. And it explains—again, there will be a lot of speculation until the truth is known, but it explains why, for example, one reason why dams weren't blown up or oilfields weren't destroyed, even though we found them to be wired with—potentially to be blown up. 
The President. That would be a day and a half later. 
The President. But troops were moving across the border earlier. 
The President. Yes, I think it's true. I think that's an accurate look back. "Shock and awe" said to many people that all we've got to do is unleash some might and people will crumble. It turns out the fighters were a lot fiercer than we thought. Because, for example, we didn't come north from Turkey, Saddam Hussein was able to move a lot of special Republican Guard units and fighters from north to south. So the resistance for our troops moving south and north was significant resistance. On the other hand, our troops handled it—we handled that resistance quite well. 
The President. Well, I believe that was a Sunday. And it was a tough day. It was a tough day for America. It was a tough day for the Commander in Chief, who committed these young soldiers into battle in the first place, which made their release even more joyous. But war is—it's tough. 
The President. No, I didn't. I've written a lot of letters, but I didn't call any parents then. I prayed for them, but I didn't call. 
The President. I did. I talked to Laura a lot during this period of time. She's been a steady source of strength and inspiration and love. And you know, there's—any time there's war and a lot of action, a lot of movement of troops and equipment, people are—there's going to be death. And it's the hardest aspect of this job, frankly, is to know that those lives were lost because of orders I gave. On the other hand, I firmly believe, and history will prove, that decisions that I made and the actions that our country took will make the world more peaceful, will help secure the United States, and as importantly, give the Iraqi people freedom, let them be free, free from the clutches of one of the most barbaric regimes in the history of mankind. 
The President. I did. I did. Secretary Rumsfeld told me that—not to get my hopes up, but there was going to be a very sensitive operation into a hospital where he thought that there would be an American POW. And that's all he said. He was very circumspect, as he should be, to a lot of people, because he didn't want any information to get out that might have jeopardized the operation. But he gave me a heads-up. And then when we heard that she had been rescued, it was a joyous moment. 
The President. No, not at all. As a matter of fact, I think time and investigation will prove a couple of points: One, that he did have terrorist connections; and secondly, that he had a weapons of mass destruction program. We know he had a weapons of mass destruction program. We now know he's not going to use them. So we've accomplished one objective, and that is that Saddam Hussein will not hurt the United States or friends or our allies with weapons of mass destruction. 
Secondly, we are learning more as we interrogate or have discussions with Iraqi scientists and people within the Iraqi structure, that perhaps he destroyed some, perhaps he dispersed some. We also know there are hundreds and hundreds of sites available for hiding the weapons, which he did effectively for 10 years from the—over 10 years from the United Nations, and that we've only looked at about 90 of those sites so far—I mean, literally hundreds of sites. 
And so we will find them. It's going to take time to find them. And the best way to find them is to continue to collect information from the humans, the Iraqis who were involved with hiding them. 
The President. I think there's going to be skepticism until people find out there was, in fact, a weapons of mass destruction program. One thing there can't be skepticism about is the fact that this guy was torturous and brutal on the Iraqi people. I mean, he brutalized them; he tortured them; he destroyed them; he cut out their tongues when they dissented. And now the people are beginning to see what freedom means within Iraq. Look at the Shi'a marches or the Shi'a pilgrimages that are taking place. 
The world will see that the United States is interested in peace, is interested in security, and interested in freedom. 
The President. Yes. I think we will. I'm pretty confident we will. 
The President. Well, first of all, we just started. The country isn't secure yet. I mean, the first things that we're worried about is making sure that the militia units of the old Fedayeen Saddam aren't out killing people. So our troops are working with coalition forces to make the country more secure. 
Secondly, we're worried about making sure there are—you know, there's the presence of a police force in these different cities to maintain order. We are just beginning to move our teams in place to help the Iraqi bureaucracies get up and running. 
I was pleased to see that the Doctors Without Borders organization said that they went into Iraq and found no grave humanitarian crisis. In other words, the food is getting to the people; medicines are getting to the people. They did say there is a shortage of personnel, professionally—not a shortage of medicine but a shortage of professionals necessary to deliver the aid, and we'll help the Iraqi people address that problem. 
My point to you is that we have an orderly process to bring stability and food and health to the Iraqi people so life can begin to return to normal. And then I'm confident that a government will emerge. I dismiss the critics who say that democracy can't flourish in Iraq. It may not look like America. You know, Thomas Jefferson may not emerge. But nevertheless, I do believe there can be a representative government and all factions can be represented. 
The President. What I would like to see is a government where church and state are separated. And I believe there's enough people within Iraq that would like that kind of—there may be a nationalist government, a government that really honors the Iraqi history and the Iraqi traditions and Iraq, itself. But it must be a government that is going to, you know, represents all the people, and I believe that can happen. 
The President. No, I wasn't surprised at all. 
The President. I mean, these were people that hated the regime under which they lived. 
The President. I don't like that part. And that was the—you know, the hospitals and museum were the absolute worst part. The good news is, is that the hospitals are now up and running. They've got enough medical supplies to take care of the people that need help. That museum was a terrible incident. I couldn't agree more with people who say we're sorry that happened. We are, by the way, helping find treasure, restore treasure, and we'll provide all the expertise and help they need to get that museum up and running again. 
But I wasn't surprised. It was vengeance, because it's like uncorking a bottle of frustration. These are people whose relatives were beaten, tortured, shocked, killed because they spoke out, because they disagreed with Saddam Hussein. And history is going to show how brutal this man and his sons and his regime really, really was. And therefore, it did not surprise me when people took vengeance on police stations or took, you know, went out into Government buildings and destroyed them. 
I'm also pleased by the fact that that level of—those riots or whatever you want to call them, released some steam, and now life is returning to normal. Things have settled down inside the country. 
The President. Yes, like the guy, the self-proclaimed mayor. 
The President. This is all—a reasonable government will evolve. We just started. It wasn't but 2 weeks ago yesterday that the statue fell down. There have been 20-plus years of tyranny. And it's hard to believe that in 20 days democracy will emerge. But the point we're making is, is that the foundation for democracy is now being laid. And by the way, there's nothing wrong with nationalism within Iraq. People say the United States should leave, and we want to leave, as soon as we've accomplished our mission. 
The President. Somebody asked me the other day, how long is it going to take to get rid of Saddam Hussein's regime? My answer is, as long as necessary. 
The President. It could. It could, or less. Who knows? But the point I'm making is, is that we are there to promote security, to make sure life returns back to normal, and to help the Iraqi people establish a government, because we believe that democracy can work within Iraq. And nationalism, by the way, you know, means it's more likely that a government will evolve that is focused on Iraq, its traditions, and its history, as opposed to focusing on a particular religion. 
The President. Well, you know, you hear a lot of reports about the vacuums being filled by Iranian agents. We certainly hope that Iraq—Iran will allow Iraq to develop into a stable and peaceful society. We have sent the word to the Iranians that that's what we expect. I talk to Tony Blair and Jose Maria Aznar on a regular basis—talked to them yesterday—and this subject came up. And both of them have got contacts with the Iranian Government, and they will send the same message, similar to what we did to Syria, that we expect there to be cooperation and—— 
The way I view the post-Saddam Iraq opportunities are these: one, that we can deal more effectively with weapons of mass destruction, that we made it clear that people who harbor weapons of mass destruction will be dealt with. Hopefully, most of it can be done diplomatically. And you'll see us—see me as well as members of my administration begin to push for new international protocols that will make international organizations more effective at stopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction. 
There's a lot of things where we can work together, is my point, to overcome any differences that might have existed on the Iraq policy. 
The President. Yes, I can understand that. I mean, these guys—first of all, the thing that was important with those countries is they provided us help when we asked for help. We needed basing help in certain countries, and they provided it. That was one of the reasons why we were successful against Saddam Hussein. We asked, and they delivered. 
The President. Well, the instant communications part was one of the reasons why I was comfortable in giving Tommy Franks and the commanders in the field the go-ahead to take the shot at Saddam Hussein on the first day. Because there in the Oval Office, we were getting near-instant feedback from eyes on the ground, what he was seeing, what he felt the conditions were like. It was an amazing moment to think that a person risking his life, viewing the farms, watching the entries, seeing, observing what was taking place inside one of Saddam's most guarded facilities, was able to pick up a device, call CENTCOM, and CENTCOM would call us in near real-time. 
The President. Well, listen, any time you think about committing someone into combat is an emotional moment. You can't be detached from the human life involved with war. And I genuinely feel that the decision I made will make America more secure. And I felt like the risks of doing nothing, the risk of taking no action far exceeded the risks of combat, particularly since I knew our plan was geared toward minimizing life—minimizing loss of life—not only minimizing loss of life on our side but on the side of the innocent Iraqis. 
The President. Oh, I think, yes, maybe about the day the prisoners, the people took the wrong turn, the kids, the cooks, and the people like that from El Paso, Fort Bliss, went the wrong way. That was a tough day. And it's got to be—listen, I went down to Camp Lejeune and met with family of—who've lost their lives. I met a young lieutenant's wife with a young baby, and it's tough. 
The President. I mean, the Dixie Chicks are free to speak their mind. They can say what they want to say. And just because— they shouldn't have their feelings hurt just because some people don't want to buy their records when they speak out. You know, freedom is a two-way street. But I have—don't really care what the Dixie Chicks said. I want to do what I think is right for the American people, and if some singers or Hollywood stars feel like speaking out, that's fine. That's the great thing about America. It stands in stark contrast to Iraq, by the way. 
The President. Well, she counsels me on a lot of things. Most of the time it's— but who's going to listen. She understood all along why I was making decisions I was making. She understood the threat that Iraq posed. She understood that Iraq was a part of the war on terror. And she doesn't—she's like a lot of people; she was nervous about war. 
The President. I'm sure he was. Nobody likes wars. 
Mr. Brokaw. Did your dad talk to you every day? 
The President. It was. It was. 
The President. I watched some of it. As you know, I've got a schedule to keep. I don't have time to sit around watching TV all day long. But somebody—I think the— Ashley or Blake said, "The statue, they're about to get it down." They had a guy hammering on it for a while, and I watched the hammering—— 
The President. I watched them hammer. And then they said, "They're hooking it up, and they've got the crane out there." And I said, "Well, let me know." They said, "Well, it's about to come down." So I hustled and then watched it. 
The President. He's my man. He was great. [Laughter] Somebody accused us of hiring him and putting him there. He was a classic. 
The President. He was great. [Laughter] 
The President. I did watch some of his clips. You know, a lot of the stuff I get, people come in and report to me—did you hear what so-and-so said, or, did you see that? So I get a lot of things secondhand. 
But in the case of the statue or Sahhaf, somebody would say, "He's getting ready to speak," and I'd pop out of a meeting or turn and watch the TV. 
The President. Yes, I saw some of that. Like, Condi will come in and say—I'll pick up the phone; I've got direct link now— I'll say, "Well, Condi, what is this business about, what does the Agency say about this latest videotape?" She'll pop in and say, "You know, I talked to Tenet, and Tenet says our analysts can't imagine that the guy could possibly be alive, walking around Baghdad the same day the statue came down." 
You know, as I told you, we had some evidence early on that strikes from the first day may have gotten him. I say "may" because we don't have the DNA in hand to prove, and people really don't want to be in a position, Tom, where you make— broadcasting success and then all of a sudden Saddam Hussein shows up somewhere. According to this one eyewitness, he's not going to show up anywhere. 
The President. I can't give you a number, but it's certainly diminished. And Khalid Sheikh Mohammed's arrest, right before the Iraqi war, was a blow to the Al Qaida network. They're still moving around. And we're watching. And we're moving. We're cutting off money. There are some parts of Afghanistan where we think some are hiding, and we've got—we're on their trail. 
The other day, for example, in the Situation Room, we had Tommy up, and he gave us a briefing on Iraq. He's the CENTCOM commander, as you know, also responsible for Afghanistan, and then the general in place in Afghanistan came up. So we split the briefing between Iraq and Afghanistan. And it was an important briefing because he was telling us troop strength and troop strategies as well as how well the country is beginning to get on its feet. 
But the point I'm trying to make is, is that we are constantly moving against Al Qaida in Afghanistan as we speak or as we conduct the Iraq theater. 

Remarks on the Global HIV/AIDS Initiative
April 29, 2003
Confronting this tragedy is the responsibility of every nation. For the United States, it is a part of the special calling that began with our founding. We believe in the dignity of life, and this conviction determines our conduct around the world. We believe that everyone has a right to liberty, including the people of Afghanistan and Iraq. We believe that everyone has a right to life, including children in the cities and villages of Africa and the Caribbean.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia and an Exchange With Reporters
April 30, 2003
Secondly, the war on Iraq has made it absolutely clear that those who harbor terrorists, fund terrorists, or harbor weapons of mass destruction will be held to account. That, in itself, helps create the conditions to move peace forward.

Address to the Nation on Iraq From the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln 
May 1, 2003
Thank you all very much. Admiral Kelly, Captain Card, officers and sailors of the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln, my fellow Americans: Major combat operations in Iraq have ended. In the battle of Iraq, the United States and our allies have prevailed. And now our coalition is engaged in securing and reconstructing that country. 
In this battle, we have fought for the cause of liberty and for the peace of the world. Our Nation and our coalition are proud of this accomplishment; yet it is you, the members of the United States military, who achieved it. Your courage, your willingness to face danger for your country and for each other, made this day possible. Because of you, our Nation is more secure. Because of you, the tyrant has fallen, and Iraq is free. 
Operation Iraqi Freedom was carried out with a combination of precision and speed and boldness the enemy did not expect and the world had not seen before. From distant bases or ships at sea, we sent planes and missiles that could destroy an enemy division or strike a single bunker. Marines and soldiers charged to Baghdad across 350 miles of hostile ground, in one of the swiftest advances of heavy arms in history. You have shown the world the skill and the might of the American Armed Forces. 
This Nation thanks all the members of our coalition who joined in a noble cause. We thank the Armed Forces of the United Kingdom, Australia, and Poland, who shared in the hardships of war. We thank all the citizens of Iraq who welcomed our troops and joined in the liberation of their own country. And tonight I have a special word for Secretary Rumsfeld, for General Franks, and for all the men and women who wear the uniform of the United States: America is grateful for a job well done. 
The character of our military through history—the daring of Normandy, the fierce courage of Iwo Jima, the decency and idealism that turned enemies into allies— is fully present in this generation. When Iraqi civilians looked into the faces of our service men and women, they saw strength and kindness and good will. When I look at the members of the United States military, I see the best of our country, and I'm honored to be your Commander in Chief. 
In the images of fallen statues, we have witnessed the arrival of a new era. For a hundred of years of war, culminating in the nuclear age, military technology was designed and deployed to inflict casualties on an ever-growing scale. In defeating Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan, Allied forces destroyed entire cities, while enemy leaders who started the conflict were safe until the final days. Military power was used to end a regime by breaking a nation. 
Today, we have the greater power to free a nation by breaking a dangerous and aggressive regime. With new tactics and precision weapons, we can achieve military objectives without directing violence against civilians. No device of man can remove the tragedy from war; yet it is a great advance when the guilty have far more to fear from war than the innocent. 
In the images of celebrating Iraqis, we have also seen the ageless appeal of human freedom. Decades of lies and intimidation could not make the Iraqi people love their oppressors or desire their own enslavement. Men and women in every culture need liberty like they need food and water and air. Everywhere that freedom arrives, humanity rejoices, and everywhere that freedom stirs, let tyrants fear. 
We have difficult work to do in Iraq. We're bringing order to parts of that country that remain dangerous. We're pursuing and finding leaders of the old regime, who will be held to account for their crimes. We've begun the search for hidden chemical and biological weapons and already know of hundreds of sites that will be investigated. We're helping to rebuild Iraq, where the dictator built palaces for himself instead of hospitals and schools. And we will stand with the new leaders of Iraq as they establish a Government of, by, and for the Iraqi people. 
The transition from dictatorship to democracy will take time, but it is worth every effort. Our coalition will stay until our work is done. And then we will leave, and we will leave behind a free Iraq. 
The battle of Iraq is one victory in a war on terror that began on September the 11th, 2001, and still goes on. That terrible morning, 19 evil men, the shock troops of a hateful ideology, gave America and the civilized world a glimpse of their ambitions. They imagined, in the words of one terrorist, that September the 11th would be the "beginning of the end of America." By seeking to turn our cities into killing fields, terrorists and their allies believed that they could destroy this Nation's resolve and force our retreat from the world. They have failed
The liberation of Iraq is a crucial advance in the campaign against terror. We've removed an ally of Al Qaida and cut off a source of terrorist funding. And this much is certain: No terrorist network will gain weapons of mass destruction from the Iraqi regime, because the regime is no more.
Ourcommitment to liberty is America's tradition, declared at our founding, affirmed in Franklin Roosevelt's Four Freedoms, asserted in the Truman Doctrine and in Ronald Reagan's challenge to an evil empire. We arecommitted to freedom in Afghanistan, in Iraq, and in a peaceful Palestine. The advance of freedom is the surest strategy to undermine the appeal of terror in the world. Where freedom takes hold, hatred gives way to hope. When freedom takes hold, men and women turn to the peaceful pursuit of a better life. American values and American interests lead in the same direction: We stand for human liberty.
Other nations in history have fought in foreign lands and remained to occupy and exploit. Americans, following a battle, want nothing more than to return home. And that is your direction tonight. After service in the Afghan and Iraqi theaters of war, after 100,000 miles on the longest carrier deployment in recent history, you are homeward bound. Some of you will see new family members for the first time; 150 babies were born while their fathers were on the Lincoln. Your families are proud of you, and your Nation will welcome you.

Remarks on the National Day of Prayer
May 1, 2003
This past month has been another time of testing for America and another time of intense prayer. Americans have been praying for the safety of our troops and for the protection of innocent life in Iraq. Americans prayed that war would not be necessary and now pray that peace will be just and lasting. 
We continue to pray for the recovery of the wounded and for the comfort of all who have lost a loved one. The Scriptures say, "The Lord is near to all who callon Him." Calling on God in prayer brings us nearer to each other. After his son was rescued from northern Iraq, the father of Sergeant James Riley of New Jersey said, "We have been flooded with people's prayers. Everyone is praying for us, and we are so grateful." 
During Operation Iraqi Freedom, many Americans have registered online to adopt a service man or woman in prayer. Others wear prayer bracelets to remind themselves to intercede on behalf of our troops. In Fountain City, Wisconsin, Lynn Cox has collected at least 80 Bibles to send to those serving in Iraq. In Green, Ohio, a group of parishioners at Queen of Heaven Catholic Church has made 2,000 rosaries for our troops. Margaret Brown, who helped start the group, said, "We want them to know that someone back here is holding them up in prayer and that God is so powerful He can supply all their needs." 

Remarks to Employees of United Defense Industries in Santa Clara, California
May 2, 2003
Yesterday I had the honor of speaking to the American people from the deck of the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln. I made this declaration, that major combat operations in Iraq have ended, the United States and our allies have prevailed.
As a result of the bravery and skill of our Armed Forces and coalition forces, the war on terror is much longer down the road because of what happened in Iraq. You see, the Al Qaida no longer have a ally in the regime in Iraq. Terrorists no longer have a funding source in the regime of Iraq. One thing is for certain: Terrorists will no longer have a source of weapons of mass destruction in the regime that used to be in Iraq, because the regime that used to be in Iraq is no longer. 
We have an obligation to future generations of Americans to make sure this country is secure, and we will keep that obligation. We have made progress, but there is more to do. In all these efforts, our men and women in uniform have performed brilliantly. By their courage, our Nation is more secure. By their skill and sacrifice, Iraq and Afghanistan are now free. 
In the Iraqi theater, the M4 Command and Control vehicles that you help produce gave our commanders unprecedented control over the battlefields. The Bradley Fighting Vehicles were responsible for a lot of tank kills. Some of the first Army units sent to take control of the Baghdad Airport were traveling in Bradleys. The world witnessed one of the swiftest advances of heavy arms in the history of warfare, a 350-mile charge from south to north in Iraq, through hostile enemy territory. We were able to do so not only because of the good strategy, great courage, and skill, but because of the Bradleys and Abrams with which our soldiers were equipped. You're making a good product here. 
One of the things that people learned about your company as well is how useful the HERCULES tank recovery system can be. The guy with the sledgehammer on the statue needed a little help. [Laughter] Thankfully, there was a HERCULES close by—[laughter]—a HERCULES which pulled that statue of Saddam Hussein to the ground. 
That meant more to the Iraqi people than you can possibly imagine. It was a symbol of their future, a future based upon something that we hold dear to our hearts, a future based upon something that is not America's gift to the world but the Almighty God's gift to each and every individual, a future based upon freedom. 
I also appreciate so very much that 35 of your fellow workers are in theater. Some were in Kuwait. Many are in Iraq, working on the products that you helped develop, working through those sandstorms and those long hauls across hostile territory. They're still in the region. They and their families need to know America is grateful for their service and their sacrifices, just as we are grateful for the service and sacrifice of many of the families whose loved ones have been and still are in theater. 
Major combat operations are over. Yet we have got commitments to keep in Iraq. Parts of that country are still dangerous, and we will provide security. We will establish order in the parts of Iraq that are dangerous. We will chase down the leaders of the old regime, and they will be held to account for the atrocious crimes they committed on the Iraqi people. 
We've got hundreds of sites to exploit, looking for the chemical and biological weapons that we know Saddam Hussein had prior to our entrance into Iraq. Listen, this guy has spent years and years and years of hiding weapons from weapons inspectors. It's going to take time, but the world will see the truth. 
We'll restore the hospitals, rebuild the schools, provide needed infrastructure in a country that didn't have as many hospitals as it needed or schools as it needed or needed infrastructure as was required, because Saddam Hussein was willing to spend money on luxurious palaces, not on the people of Iraq. We will stand with the new leaders of Iraq as they build a Government of, by, and for the Iraqi people. 
This is going to take time. The efforts to restore security and infrastructure is going to take time, and it's not going to be easy work. But we will staythecourse. We will stay as long as necessary to get the job done, and then we will leave. And when we leave, we will leave behind a free Iraq. 
We believe in the peace, in keeping the peace. And the best way to make the world more peaceful and the best way to fight hatred, the hateful ideologies oftentimes found in corners of the world, is to promote freedom. Free people are less likely to hate. Free people are more likely to focus on a hopeful future. We love freedom in America. It's ingrained in our soul. We also understand the habits of freedom are more likely to make the world a more peaceful and hopeful place. We will stay in Iraq until it is free, and we will stay to make sure the foundations for freedom are real and solid. 
We've come through some hard times. Remember, we've overcome a recession. We've overcome an attack on our soil. We have been in two major battles in the war against terror, one in Afghanistan, one in Iraq. We had some of our fellow citizens forget what it means to be a responsible citizen, some CEOs of corporations in America who felt it would be okay to fudge the numbers, to not tell the truth. Their irresponsible behavior affected the psychology of the country. We'll take care of them.


















































