MID 457701, Pakistan

Remarks to the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
February 15, 2007
In recent months, the intensity of the fighting has died down—that's only natural. It does every year when the snow and ice set in there in Afghanistan. But even in these winter months, we stayed on the offense against the Taliban and Al Qaida. This January, NATO reconnaissance units observed a major Taliban incursion from Pakistan—with about 150 Taliban fighters crossing the border into the Paktika Province. So NATO and Afghan forces launched a coordinated air assault and ground assault, and we destroyed the Taliban force. A large number of enemy fighters were killed; they were forced to retreat, where they were engaged by Pakistani troops
Now, there's another part of our strategy I want to share with you, and that is to help President Musharraf defeat the terrorists and extremists who operate inside of Pakistan. We're going to work with Pakistan and Afghanistan to enhance cooperation to defeat what I would call a common enemy. Taliban and Al Qaida fighters do hide in remote regions of Pakistan—this is wild country. This is wilder than the Wild West. And these folks hide and recruit and launch attacks. 
The President understands our desire to work with him to eliminate this kind of action. People say, "Well, do you think President Musharraf really understands the threat of extremists in his midst?" I said, "Yes, I do." You know how I know? They've tried to kill him. Al Qaida has launched attacks against the President of this country. He understands. He also understands that extremists can destabilize countries on the border or destabilize countries from which they launch their attacks. And so he's launched what they call a frontier strategy, and that is to find and eliminate the extremists and deliver better governance and economic opportunity. 
We're helping him in these efforts. It's in our interest to help him. We provided him—we've helped him equip his security forces that are patrolling the border regions with Afghanistan. We're funding construction of more than 100 border outposts, which will provide their forces with better access to remote regions of this part of the country. We've given him high-tech equipment to help the Pakistani forces locate the terrorists attempting to cross the border. We're funding an air wing, with helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, to give Pakistan better security, better swift response, and better surveillance. 
President Musharraf is going to better be able to now deal with this problem. Bob Gates went out and visited with him recently—had a good response. He's an ally in this war on terror, and it's in our interest to support him in fighting the extremists. 
I also had an interesting meeting at the White House last September—and that is, I hosted a private dinner with President Musharraf and President Karzai, right there in what's called the Family Dining Room. It was a fascinating discussion. Clearly there are different histories and different anxieties about the way forward. We did reach some agreements, however: that it's in all our interests for people to work together, for example, to improve intelligence sharing. It's in our interest to expand trade between these two countries. In other words, on the one hand, it's in our interest to work closely on security for security operations, but it's also in our mutual inter-est—all three of our interests—to provide different alternatives for people to choose from. 
Remember, I said earlier that oftentimes, people support the Taliban—or sometimes, they support the Taliban in Afghanistan because it's the only job they can find. If that's the case—and I believe it's true— we need to help these folks provide an economy that gives hope. And so one way we can do this is what we call reconstruction opportunity zones that exist on both sides of the Pak and Afghan border. These zones will give residents the chance to export locally made products to the United States, duty free. That's our contribution. Got a vast market, wealthy country with a lot of consumers, and it's not going to take much to provide hope if we can get little manufacturing enterprises set up, local entrepreneurs to be able to manufacture goods and sell them here in our country. It's a tiny contribution for us and a major contribution for providing the conditions necessary for stability. 
Well, I'm going to continue to work with both the leaders. It's a useful role for the President of the United States to be in constant contact with both Presidents, to remind them of the great obligations we have to fight the extremists and to help people realize dreams. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With United States Ambassador-Designate to Iraq Ryan C. Crocker
February 16, 2007
The President. I just had a lengthy conversation with our nominee to be the Ambassador from the United States to Iraq. I've gotten to know Ambassador Ryan Crocker during my time as President because he's been—fulfilled a very important mission for the United States, and that is the Ambassador to Pakistan, where he served ably and served well. And I'm confident I picked the right man to be our new Ambassador in Iraq.
By the way, we're looking forward to quick Senate confirmation. He's had his hearing. And of course, when I call him "Ambassador," it's not Ambassador to Iraq—it's Ambassador-designee to Iraq— but Ambassador now in Pakistan. And the Senate needs to confirm him as quickly as possible so he can join General Petraeus and do the job.

