MID 61103, US v North Vietnam, 25 Dec 1963 to 24-Jan-64 to 27-Jan-73


170 - The President's News Conference
February 1, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. If we could have neutralization of both North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam, I am sure that would be considered sympathetically. But I see no indication of that at the moment. I think that if we could expect the Viet Cong to let their neighbors live in peace, we could take a much different attitude. But as long as these raids are continuing and people are attempting to envelop South Viet-Nam, I think that the present course we are conducting is the only answer to that course, and I think that the operations should be stepped up there. I see no sentiment favoring neutralization of South Viet-Nam alone, and I think the course that we are following is the most advisable one for freedom at this point

THE PRESIDENT. Well, you will have to ask General de Gaulle about the details of his proposal. But as I understand it, the neutralization talk has applied only to South Viet-Nam and not to the whole of that area of the world. I think that the only thing we need to do to have complete peace in that area of the world now is to stop the invasion of South Viet-Nam by some of its neighbors and supporters



201 - The President's News Conference
February 29, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. We have asked Secretary McNamara, who has made 'periodic visits to Saigon, to go to Viet-Nam in the next few days. He will go there and have his conferences and will bring back very valuable information. We have a very difficult situation in Viet-Nam. We are furnishing advice and counsel and training to the South Viet-Nam army. And we must rely on them for such action as is taken to defend themselves. 
We think that Mr. McNamara will correctly appraise the situation on this trip and make such recommendations as he deems appropriate. I do not think that the speculation that has been made that we should enter into a neutralization of that area, or that we are losing the fight in that area, or that things have gone to pot there, are at all justified. I think that they do our cause a great disservice, but we are keeping in close touch with it daily. 
We have Ambassador Lodge, who heads our forces in that area. He is in constant communication with us. He makes recommendations from time to time. We act promptly on those recommendations. We feel that we are following the proper course and that our national interests are being fully protected


211 - The President's News Conference
March 7, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I don't think that the American public has fully understood the reason for our withdrawing any advisers from South Viet-Nam, and I think they should. We have called back approximately 1,000 people. A good many of those people, several hundred, were there training guards, policemen. Once those people were trained, we felt that they could act as policemen as well as our people could act. So, we withdrew those people. 
From time to time, as our training mission is completed, other people will be withdrawn. From time to time, as additional advisers are needed, or as people to train additional Vietnamese are needed, we will send them out there. But we see no reason to keep the companies of MP's out there, after they have already trained the Vietnamese who can perform the duty equally as well. 
I think that a good deal will depend on what Secretary McNamara advises concerning who is withdrawn, when they are withdrawn, and who is sent out, and when they are sent out. The Secretary, with General Taylor, and a very able staff, are there now, carefully studying the question and will be there almost a week. 
When his report is in, we will carefully evaluate it, and if additional men are needed, we will send them. If others have completed their mission, we will withdraw them. But because we withdraw some MP's from Saigon who have trained people to take their place, there is no indication that we are not still just as interested in South Viet-Nam as we have always been




218 - Transcript of Television and Radio Interview Conducted by Representatives of Major Broadcast Services.
March 15, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. No, and I made no such hint. I said it was a dangerous game to try to supply arms and become an aggressor and deprive people of their freedom, and that is true, whether it is in Viet-Nam or whether it is in this hemisphere, wherever it is. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't think so. I think that we have problems there. We have difficulties there. We have had for 10 years, and as I told you, a good many things have come and gone during that period of time; as long as there are people trying to preserve their freedom, we want to help them




379 - The President's News Conference
June 2, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I would say that Mr. Laird is not as yet speaking for the administration. He might next year sometime. To my knowledge he has no authority to speak for it at this stage


420 - The President's News Conference
June 23, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I think that I would say that we believe, as I just stated, that they are aware of our attitude and that they have no doubt about our policy or our position




475 - The President's News Conference
July 24, 1964

Third, in the continuing discussion of Southeast Asia, let me state American policy once more. We are determined to support the freedom and the independence of South Viet-Nam, where Prime Minister Khanh and Ambassador Taylor have established the closest understanding with each other. They are in continual consultation and the policies of the two nations are the same; namely, to increase the effectiveness of the whole program in that country--political, social, economic, and military. 
It is true that there is danger and provocation from the North, and such provocation could force a response, but it is also true that the United States seeks no wider war. Other friends suggest that this problem must be moved to a conference table and, indeed, if others would keep the solemn agreements already signed at a conference table, there would be no problem in South Viet-Nam. 
If those who practice terror and ambush and murder will simply honor their existing agreements, there can easily be peace in Southeast Asia immediately. But we do not believe in a conference called to ratify terror, so our policy is unchanged. For 10 years, and in three different administrations, the United States has been committed to the freedom and the independence of South Viet-Nam, helping others to help themselves
THE PRESIDENT. The answer is no. I stated that earlier, but I repeat it




498 - Radio and Television Report to the American People Following Renewed Aggression in the Gulf of Tonkin
August 4, 1964

The performance of commanders and crews in this engagement is in the highest tradition of the United States Navy. But repeated acts of violence against the Armed Forces of the United States must be met not only with alert defense, but with positive reply. That reply is being given as I speak to you tonight. Air action is now in execution against gunboats and certain supporting facilities in North Viet-Nam which have been used in these hostile operations. 
In the larger sense this new act of aggression, aimed directly at our own forces, again brings home to all of us in the United States the importance of the struggle for peace and security in southeast Asia. Aggression by terror against the peaceful villagers of South Viet-Nam has now been joined by open aggression on the high seas against the United States of America. 
The determination of all Americans to carry out our full commitment to the people and to the government of South Viet-Nam will be redoubled by this outrage. Yet our response, for the present, will be limited and fitting. We Americans know, although others appear to forget, the risks of spreading conflict. We still seek no wider war




499 - Remarks at Syracuse University on the Communist Challenge in Southeast Asia.
August 5, 1964

On August 2 the United States destroyer Maddox was attacked on the high seas in the Gulf of Tonkin by hostile vessels of the Government of North Viet-Nam. 
On August 4 that attack was repeated in those same waters against two United States destroyers. 
The attacks were deliberate. 
The attacks were unprovoked. 
The attacks have been answered. 
Throughout last night and within the last 12 hours, air units of the United States Seventh Fleet have sought out the hostile vessels and certain of their supporting facilities.. Appropriate armed action has been taken against them. The United States is now asking that this be brought immediately and urgently before the Security Council of the United Nations. 
We welcome--and we invite--the scrutiny of all men who seek peace, for peace is the only purpose of the course that America pursues. 
The Gulf of Tonkin may be distant, but none can be detached about what has happened there. 
Aggression--deliberate, willful, and systematic aggression--has unmasked its face to the entire world. The world remembers-the world must never forget--that aggression unchallenged is aggression unleashed. 
We of the United States have not forgotten. 
That is why we have answered this aggression with action. 
America's course is not precipitate. America's course is not without long provocation. 
For 10 years three American Presidents-President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and your present President--and the American people have been actively concerned with threats to the peace and security of the peoples of southeast Asia from the Communist government of North Viet-Nam. 
President Eisenhower sought--and President Kennedy sought--the same objectives that I still seek: 
That the governments of southeast Asia honor the international agreements which apply in the area; 
That those governments leave each other alone; 
That they resolve their differences peacefully; 
That they devote their talents to bettering the lives of their peoples by working against poverty and disease and ignorance. 
In 1954 we made our position clear toward Viet-Nam. 
In June of that year we stated we "would view any renewal of the aggression in violation of the 1954 agreements with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and security." 
In September of that year the United States signed the Manila pact on which our participation in SEATO is based. That pact recognized that aggression by means of armed attack on South Viet-Nam would endanger the peace and the safety of the nations signing that solemn agreement. 
In 1962 we made our position clear toward Laos. We signed the Declaration of Neutrality of Laos. That accord provided for the withdrawal of all foreign forces and respect for the neutrality and independence of that little country. 
The agreements of 1954 and 1962 were also signed by the government of North Viet-Nam. 
In 1954 that government pledged that it would respect the territory under the military control of the other party and engage in no hostile act against the other party. 
In 1962 that government pledged that it would "not introduce into the Kingdom of Laos foreign troops or military personnel." 
That government also pledged that it would "not use the territory of the Kingdom of Laos for interference in the internal affairs of other countries." 
That government of North Viet-Nam is now willfully and systematically violating those agreements of both 1954 and 1962. 
To the south it is engaged in aggression against the Republic of Viet-Nam. 
To the west it is engaged in aggression against the Kingdom of Laos. 
To the east it has now struck out on the high seas in an act of aggression against the United States of America. 
There can be, there must be no doubt about the policy and no doubt about the purpose. 
So there can be no doubt about the responsibilities of men and the responsibilities of nations that are devoted to peace. 
Peace cannot be assured merely by assuring the safety of the United States destroyer Maddox or the safety of other vessels of other flags. 
Peace requires that the existing agreements in the area be honored. 
Peace requires that we and all our friends stand firm against the present aggressions of the government of North Viet-Nam. 
The government of North Viet-Nam is today flouting the will of the world for peace. The world is challenged to make its will against war known and to make it known clearly and to make it felt and to make it felt decisively. 
So, to our friends of the Atlantic Alliance, let me say this, this morning: the challenge that we face in southeast Asia today is the same challenge that we have faced with courage and that we have met with strength in Greece and Turkey, in Berlin and Korea, in Lebanon and in Cuba. And to any who may be tempted to support or to widen the present aggression I say this: there is no threat to any peaceful power from the United States of America. But there can be no peace by aggression and no immunity from reply. That is what is meant by the actions that we took yesterday. 



597 - Remarks in Oklahoma at the Dedication of the Eufaula Dam.
September 25, 1964

There are those that say you ought to go north and drop bombs, to try to wipe out the supply lines, and they think that would escalate the war. We don't want our American boys to do the fighting for Asian boys. We don't want to get involved in a nation with 700 million people and get tied down in a land war in Asia. 
There are some that say we ought to go south and get out and come home, but we don't like to break our treaties and we don't like to walk off and leave people who are searching for freedom, and suffering to obtain it, and walk out on them. We remember when we wanted our freedom from Great Britain, and we remember the people that helped us with it, and we'll never forget them. So we don't want to run out on them. 
So what are we doing? We're staying there and supplying them with some of the things that we have, some of the things that the richest, most powerful nation in the world has developed. We have some tanks, some planes, and some helicopters. We have 20,000 men out there advising and helping them, and we're hoping that some way, somehow, these people that are invading them and trying to envelop them and trying to take their freedom away from them will some day decide that it's not worth the price and they will leave their neighbors alone and we can have peace in the world. 
But we are not about to start another war and we're not about to run away from where we are




607 - Remarks in Manchester to the Members of the New Hampshire Weekly Newspaper Editors Association.
September 28, 1964
Some of our people--Mr. Nixon, Mr. Rockefeller, Mr. Scranton, and Mr. Goldwater--have all, at some time or other, suggested the possible wisdom of going north in Viet-Nam. Well, now, before you start attacking someone and you launch a big offensive, you better give some consideration to how you are going to protect what you have. And when a brigadier general can walk down the streets of Saigon as they did the other day, and take over the police station, the radio station, and the government without firing a shot, I don't know how much offensive we are prepared to launch. 
As far as I am concerned, I want to be very cautious and careful, and use it only as a last resort, when I start dropping bombs around that are likely to involve American boys in a war in Asia with 700 million Chinese. 
So just for the moment I have not thought that we were ready for American boys to do the fighting for Asian boys. What I have been trying to do, with the situation that I found, was to get the boys in Viet-Nam to do their own fighting with our advice and with our equipment. That is the course we are following. So we are not going north and drop bombs at this stage of the game, and we are not going south and run out and leave it for the Communists to take over. 
Now we have lost 190 American lives, and to each one of those 190 families this is a major war. We lost that many in Texas on the Fourth of July in wrecks. But I often wake up in the night and think about how many I could lose if I made a misstep. 
When we retaliated in the Tonkin Gulf, we dropped bombs on their nests where they had their PT boats housed, and we dropped them within 35 miles of the Chinese border. I don't know what you would think if they started dropping them 35 miles from your border, but I think that that is something you have to take into consideration.
So we are not going north and we are not going south; we are going to continue to try to get them to save their own freedom with their own men, with our leadership, and our officer direction, and such equipment as we can furnish them. We think that losing 190 lives in the period that we have been out there is bad. But it is not like 190,000 that we might lose the first month if we escalated that war. 
So we are trying somehow to evolve a way, as we have in some other places, where the North Vietnamese and the Chinese Communists will finally, after getting worn down, conclude that they will leave their neighbors alone. And if they do, we will come home tomorrow. 
It is not any problem to start a war. That is the easiest thing in the world. I know some folks that I think could start one mighty easy. But it is a pretty difficult problem for all of us to prevent one, and that is what we are trying to do




612 - Remarks to the Faculty and Students of Johns Hopkins University.
October 1, 1964

The other day our ships were fired upon in the Gulf of Tonkin. Acting upon orders, they defended themselves and destroyed the enemy to the extent that it was possible very promptly. 
Forthwith we considered what judgments we should make and what actions should follow. And after due consideration, with full reports from all involved, we selected the nest that harbored these boats, eliminated the areas that involved huge civilian populations, and made prompt and adequate response, destroying substantially that PT fleet and the nest that had harbored them. 
So, I use these illustrations to show you that it could have been easy in one wave to wipe out women and children and to drop bombs on North Viet-Nam and on China because these nests were located within 35 miles of the Chinese border. 
But government must be restrained in the pursuit as well as the use of power itself. And government must be moderate in the belief of its own infallibility.



780 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
November 28, 1964

THE PRESIDENT. I think Mr. Kilduff 4 reviewed with you yesterday the feeling of this administration. I don't want to give you any particular guideposts as to your conduct in the matter. But when you crawl out on a limb, you always have to find another one to crawl back on. 
I have just been sitting here in this serene atmosphere of the Pedernales for the last few days reading about the wars that you have involved us in and the additional undertakings that I have made decisions on or that General Taylor5 has recommended or that Mr. McNamara plans or Secretary Rusk envisages. I would say, generally speaking, that some people are speculating and taking positions that I would think are somewhat premature. 
We have had many conferences in the last year in connection with the South Viet-Nam situation. It has been a serious problem for many years. Secretary McNamara has made several trips out there. Secretary Rusk has made two trips out there since I became President. The first meetings I had as President were with Ambassador Lodge 6 who was called in. I have had other meetings with General Taylor and other conferences. We have scheduled them in Honolulu. 
In retrospect, as you look back over your writings during all of that period, they are somewhat similar to what they are today. I don't know whether you have a black sheet that you take out every time we have a meeting on it and rewrite it, but in Honolulu we had these dire predictions and we served notice on the world that we were about to launch a big new effort. 
I would say the situation is always serious. It is quite a problem. Periodically we will have meetings with our top people. Every few weeks we will have General Taylor or Mr. Johnson or General Westmoreland 7 or some other people from out there in here. We will evaluate the situation. We will do everything we can to make it more effective and more efficient. The only thing we need to do to end our real problem in that area is for some folks out there to leave their neighbors alone. We hope in due tithe that that can be brought about. 
At the moment, General Taylor will report to us on developments. We will carefully consider those reports. He is meeting with Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk, Mr. Bundy and Mr. Harriman, I believe, today and tomorrow. I will meet with him in the early part of the week.8 I anticipate that there will be no dramatic announcement to come out of these meetings except in the form of your speculation. 



22 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
January 16, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I would not ever entertain a hope of reducing your speculation. I'm an optimist and I want to look forward to the 21st century but I can't go that far. I think in connection with that, there has been published, as you are familiar with, the loss of our planes. I think you have known for sometime, since last May, at the request of the Government of Laos we have been helping them, attempting to help defend them, and I do not think it wise public policy or desirable to go into the details--for me to go into the details of military operations


46 - The President's News Conference
February 4, 1965

believe that we will continue, as I said before, to do our very best to make our effort in Viet-Nam more efficient and more effective in helping the people of Viet-Nam to help themselves. I would not want to speculate on what might be it- this situation happened or that situation happened. I would want to cross that bridge when I came to it. But I do not anticipate crossing any such bridge as was indicated by the dispatch from Paris



117 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
March 20, 1965

Let me say this additionally on Viet-Nam. One year ago on March 17, 1964, I made this statement, and I quote: "For 10 years, under three Presidents, this Nation has been determined to help a brave people to resist aggression and terror. It is and it will remain the policy of the United States to furnish assistance to support South Viet-Nam for as long as is required to bring Communist aggression and terrorism under control." 
Our policy in Viet-Nam is the same as it was 1 year ago, and to those of you who have inquiries on the subject, it is the same as it was 10 years ago. I have publicly stated it. I have reviewed it to the Congress in joint sessions. I have reviewed it in various messages to the Congress and I have talked individually with more than 500 of them stating the policy and asking and answering questions on that subject in the last 60 days. In addition, I have stated this policy to the press and to the public in almost every State in the Union. Specifically last night I read where I had made the policy statement 47 times. Well, I want to repeat it again this morning for your information and for emphasis. 
Under this policy, changes in the situation may require from time to time changes in tactics, in strategy, in equipment, in personnel. As I said last month, the continuing actions we take will be those that are justified and made necessary by the continuing aggression of others. These aggressors serve no peaceful interest, not even their own. No one threatens their regime. There is no intent or desire to conquer them or to occupy their land. What is wanted is simply that they carry out their agreements, that they end their aggression against their neighbors. 
The real goal of all of us in southeast Asia must be the peaceful progress of the people of that area. They have theright to live side by side in peace and independence. And if this little country does not have that fight then the question is what will happen to the other hundred little countries who want to preserve that right. They have a right to build a new sense of community among themselves. They have a right to join, with help from others, in the full development of their own resources for their own benefit. They have a right to live together without fear or oppression or domination from any quarter of this entire globe. 
So this is the peace for which the United States of America works today. This is the peace which aggression from the north today prevents. This is the peace which will remain the steadfast goal of the United States of America.
THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't want to tell you or them or the country any of our evaluation of military operations at this time. We are being as effective and as efficient as we know how. We have our policy of responding appropriately, fittingly, and measured. 
We are doing everything that we know to try to bring about freedom for South Viet-Nam and peace in that area. That was the policy that General Eisenhower announced when he was President when we assumed responsibilities there. That was the policy provided for in the SEATO Treaty that passed the Senate 82 to 1, which obligates us to the commitment we have made there. That was the policy that was incorporated in the resolution passed August the 10th by the Congress. But to give a day-to-day evaluation of what effect this strike or that strike might have would not only contribute, I think, to confusion and perhaps might be inaccurate, but would be ill advised, I think




135 - Televised Remarks Announcing the Arrest of Members of the Ku Klux Klan.
March 26, 1965

I callon every law enforcement officer in America to insist on obedience to the law and to insist on respect for justice. No nation can long endure either in history's judgment or in its own national conscience if hoodlums or bigots can defy the law and can get away with it. Justice must be done in the largest city as well as the smallest village, on the dirt road or on the interstate highway. We will not be intimidated by the terrorists of the Ku Klux Klan any more than we will be intimidated by the terrorists in North Viet-Nam. We will reduce the sacrifices of those who suffer now in a society free of the Klan and those who support its vicious work



156 - The President's News Conference
April 1, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I think that we are following a course of action that is calculated to best represent the interests of this Nation, and beyond that I see no real good that would flow from prophesies or predictions. I sometimes think that we do not really give as much consideration as we ought to on the problems of our country and the interest of our country and the need in our country to accept and understand pictures before making judgments and recommendations. 
I earnestly believe that your Government has the ablest military leadership in the world. I genuinely believe that the most experienced and patriotic and knowledgeable men that are available in the United States are providing leadership in the diplomatic and political field under the guidance of Secretary Rusk. 7 I know that those associated with me in the White House love peace and hate war and are willing to do anything that honorable people can do to try to discuss our .problems and solve them in ways short of destroying human beings. But our concerns and our conduct sometimes are determined to a degree by the conduct of other people. 
We have a commitment to the people of South Viet-Nam. That commitment is not only the result of the commitment President Eisenhower made in his letter 8 but that the Congress of the United States--the Senate made in its vote of 82 to 1 in approving the SEATO Treaty which provided that in effect when any nation was attacked and asked for our help, any signatories of that treaty would receive that help. So we have that commitment; if we ignore that treaty, we might as well tear up all the treaties we are party to. 
But just so that everyone could have a chance to participate and there would be no one-man decisions, I asked the Congress for their decision and their judgment last August and by a vote of 502 to 2 they approved the Commander in Chief taking all efforts necessary to prevent aggression in South Viet-Nam and to try to keep that little nation from being swallowed up by aggressors. Now, for 16 months since I inherited this problem I have tried to provide a cautious leadership and an effective leadership and attempted to prevail upon people to stop this aggression. We are continuing to exercise all the diplomatic and political leadership that is possible and conceivable at this end. But if that does not succeed, we do not plan to come running home and abandon this little nation or tear up ourcommitments or go back on our word. 
We seek no wider war, as I have stated many times, and I would appeal to our own people who are concerned by the roar of a plane that may destroy a building but kill no people, to be equally as concerned when bombs are thrown into our embassies and American citizens are carried out on stretchers and American lives are taken. I would appeal to all of the folks who detest war to also be concerned when American compounds are entered and bombs are dropped on American soldiers and they lose their lives by the dozens. 
So we will try to take such measures as are appropriate and fitting and measures that are calculated to deter the aggressor. And we think in due time the course of justice and wisdom will prevail. 
This is a very serious matter. Many men are dying because of the problem that exists there with the aggressors and the infiltrators coming in from North Viet-Nam, hitting our compounds at 2 o'clock in the morning. So when I see and hear people say that there is a group here on one side and a group here on the other side and there is great division here, we are moving to a great critical decision, I am afraid that they have a good hat but not a very solid judgment on their shoulders or on their head




172 - Address at Johns Hopkins University: "Peace Without Conquest."
April 7, 1965
Tonight Americans and Asians are dying for a world where each people may choose its own path to change. 
This is the principle for which our ancestors fought in the valleys of Pennsylvania. It is the principle for which our sons fight tonight in the jungles of Viet-Nam. 
Viet-Nam is far away from this quiet campus. We have no territory there, nor do we seek any. The war is dirty and brutal and difficult. And some 400 young men, born into an America that is bursting with opportunity and promise, have ended their lives on Viet-Nam's steaming soil. 
Why must we take this painful road? 
Why must this Nation hazard its ease, and its interest, and its power for the sake of a people so far away? 
We fight because we must fight if we are to live in a world where every country can shape its own destiny. And only in such a world will our own freedom be finally secure. 
This kind of world will never be built by bombs or bullets. Yet the infirmities of man are such that force must often precede reason, and the waste of war, the works of peace. 
We wish that this were not so. But we must deal with the world as it is, if it is ever to be as we wish. 
THE NATURE OF THE CONFLICT The world as it is in Asia is not a serene or peaceful place. 
The first reality is that North Viet-Nam has attacked the independent nation of South Viet-Nam. Its object is total conquest. 
Of course, some of the people of South Viet-Nam are participating in attack on their own government. But trained men and supplies, orders and arms, flow in a constant stream from north to south. 
This support is the heartbeat of the war. 
And it is a war of unparalleled brutality. Simple farmers are the targets of assassination and kidnapping. Women and children are strangled in the night because their men are loyal to their government. And help less villages are ravaged by sneak attacks. Large-scale raids are conducted on towns, and terror strikes in the heart of cities. 
The confused nature of this conflict cannot mask the fact that it is the new face of an old enemy. 
Over this war--and all Asia--is another reality: the deepening shadow of Communist China. The rulers in Hanoi are urged on by Peking. This is a regime which has destroyed freedom in Tibet, which has attacked India, and has been condemned by the United Nations for aggression in Korea. It is a nation which is helping the forces of violence in almost every continent. The contest in Viet-Nam is part of a wider pattern of aggressive purposes. 
WHY ARE WE IN VIET-NAM ? Why are these realities our concern? Why are we in South Viet-Nam ? 
We are there because we have a promise to keep. Since 1954 every American President has offered support to the people of South Viet-Nam. We have helped to build, and we have helped to defend. Thus, over many years, we have made a national pledge to he!p South Viet-Nam defend its independence. 
And I intend to keep that promise. 
To dishonor that pledge, to abandon this small and brave nation to its enemies, and to the terror that must follow, would be an unforgivable wrong. 
We are also there to strengthen world order. Around the globe, from Berlin to Thailand, are people whose well-being rests, in part, on the belief that they can count on us if they are attacked. To leave Viet-Nam to its fate would shake the confidence of all these people in the value of an American commitment and in the value of America's word. The result would be increased unrest and instability, and even wider war. 
We are also there because there are great stakes in the balance. Let no one think for a moment that retreat from Viet-Nam would bring an end to conflict. The battle would be renewed in one country and then another. The central lesson of our time is that the appetite of aggression is never satisfied. To withdraw from one battlefield means only to prepare for the next. We must say in southeast Asia--as we did in Europe--in the words of the Bible: "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further." 
There are those who say that all our effort there will be futile--that China's power is such that it is bound to dominate all southeast Asia. But there is no end to that argument until all of the nations of Asia are swallowed up. 
There are those who wonder why we have a responsibility there. Well, we have it there for the same reason that we have a responsibility for the defense of Europe. World War II was fought in both Europe and Asia, and when it ended we found ourselves with continued responsibility for the defense of freedom. 
OUR OBJECTIVE IN VIET-NAM Our objective is the independence of South Viet-Nam, and its freedom from attack. We want nothing for ourselves--only that the people of South Viet-Nam be allowed to guide their own country in their own way. 
We will do everythingnecessary to reach that objective. And we will do only what is absolutely necessary. 
In recent months attacks on South Viet-Nam were stepped up. Thus, it became necessary for us to increase our response and to make attacks by air. This is not a change of purpose. It is a change in what we believe that purpose requires. 
We do this in order to slow down aggression. 
We do this to increase the confidence of the brave people of South Viet-Nam who have bravely borne this brutal battle for so many years with so many casualties. 
And we do this to convince the leaders of North Viet-Nam--and all who seek to share their conquest--of a very simple fact: We will not be defeated. We will not grow tired. 
We will not withdraw, either openly or under the cloak of a meaningless agreement. 
We know that air attacks alone will not accomplish all of these purposes. But it is our best and prayerful judgment that they are a necessary part of the surest road to peace. 
We hope that peace will come swiftly. But that is in the hands of others besides ourselves. And we must be prepared for a long continued conflict. It will require patience as well as bravery, the will to endure as well as the will to resist. 
I wish it were possible to convince others with words of what we now find it necessary to say with guns and planes: Armed hostility is futile. Our resources are equal to any challenge. Because we fight for values and we fight for principles, rather than territory or colonies, our patience and our determination are unending. 
Once this is clear, then it should also be clear that the only path for reasonable men is the path of peaceful settlement. 
Such peace demands an independent South Viet-Nam--securely guaranteed and able to shape its own relationships to all others-free from outside interference--tied to no alliance--a military base for no other country. 
These are the essentials of any final settlement. 
We will never be second in the search for such a peaceful settlement in Viet-Nam. 
There may be many ways to this kind of peace: in discussion or negotiation with the governments concerned; in large groups or in small ones; in the reaffirmation of old agreements or their strengthening with new ones. 
We have stated this position over and over again, fifty times and more, to friend and foe alike. And we remain ready, with this purpose, for unconditional discussions. 
And until that bright and necessary day of peace we will try to keep conflict from spreading. We have no desire to see thousands die in battle--Asians or Americans. We have no desire to devastate that which the people of North Viet-Nam have built with toil and sacrifice. We will use our power with restraint and with all the wisdom that we can command. But we will use it. 
This war, like most wars, is filled with terrible irony. For what do the people of North Viet-Nam want? They want what their neighbors also desire: food for their hunger; health for their bodies; a chance to learn; progress for their country; and an end to the bondage of material misery. And they would find all these things far more readily in peaceful association with others than in the endless course of battle. 
The first step is for the countries of southeast Asia to associate themselves in a greatly expanded cooperative effort for development. We would hope that North Viet-Nam would take its place in the common effort just as soon as peaceful cooperation is possible. 
The ordinary men and women of North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam--of China and India--of Russia and America--are brave people. They are filled with the same proportions of hate and fear, of love and hope. Most of them want the same things for themselves and their families. Most of them do not want their sons to ever die in battle, or to see their homes, or the homes of others, destroyed




194 - Statement by the President: "Tragedy, Disappointment, and Progress" in Viet-Nam.
April 17, 1965

I regret the necessities of war have compelled us to bomb North Viet-Nam. We have carefully limited those raids. They have been directed at radar stations, bridges, and ammunition dumps, not at population centers. They have been directed at concrete and steal, and not human life. 
I understand the feelings of those who regret that we must undertake air attacks. I share those feelings, but the compassion of this country and the world must go out to the men and women and children who are killed and crippled by the Viet Cong every day in South Viet-Nam. The outrage of this country and the world must be visited on those who explode their bombs in cities and villages, ripping the bodies of the helpless. The indignation of this country and the world must extend to all who seek dominion over others with a violent and ruthless disregard for life, happiness, or security. 
And let us remember, the people of South Viet-Nam and the Americans who share their struggle suffer because they are attacked, not because they are attackers. 
It has been a week of disappointment because we tried to open a window to peace only to be met with tired names and slogans-and a refusal to talk. 
They want no talk with us, no talk with a distinguished Briton, no talk with the United Nations. They want no talk at all--so far. But our offer stands. We mean every word of it. 
Peace is too important, the stakes are far too high, to permit anyone to indulge in slander and invective. 
We will not reply in kind. The window to peace is still open. We are still ready for unconditional discussion. We will impose no conditions of any kind on any government willing to talk, nor will we accept any. On this basis we are ready to begin discussion next week, tomorrow, or tonight. 
Nor can the continuation of the war be used to doubt the sincerity of our peaceful purpose. The infiltration continues. The terror continues. Death in the night continues. And we must also continue. 
To those governments who doubt our willingness to talk, the answer is simple: Agree to discussion. Come to the meeting room. We will be there. 
Our objective in Viet-Nam remains the same--an independent South Viet-Nam, tied to no alliance, free to shape its relations and associations with all other nations. 
This is what the people of South Viet-Nam want. And we will finally settle for no less. 
Our policy also remains the same: to strive for peace, but not to yield to aggression; to use what power we must, but no more than we need; to stay until independence is secure, but to leave when that independence is surely guaranteed. 
And let this also be dear [clear]: Until that independence is guaranteed there is no human power capable of forcing us from Viet-Nam. 
We will remain as long as is necessary, with the might that is required, whatever the risk and whatever the cost. 
We are told by some that there can be no peace and no hope for a better life unless we first surrender and abandon South Viet-Nam. 
This we will not do. 
And I hope that a mounting crescendo of world opinion that is weary of war, that is opposed to aggression, will finally find a way to reach the ears of those that are now deaf to calls for peace. 
This has been a week of progress because it has brought a strengthened unity of American purpose. More than ever, in the Congress and in the press, among people in every section and every occupation, we are united on the need to resist aggression, to pursue peace, and to improve the lives of the people of southeast Asia. 
There has also been progress around the world in understanding the peaceful aims which we share with the Government of South Viet-Nam. There has been renewed appreciation that by defending South Viet-Nam we also stand for the independence of all who have cause to fear their neighbors. And our unyielding determination has strengthened the hope of those menaced by terror and discouraged those who expect conquest by default. As a result, news from the battlefront is improving. 
It is more clear than ever that the real hope for the South Vietnamese is not with the attackers but against them. I join the Vietnamese Government in a warm welcome to the increasing numbers who choose to leave that false cause and rejoin their countrymen. 
Progress has also come in the beginning of a massive new effort to improve the lives of the people of southeast Asia. 
These countries are not pawns on a chessboard. They are not simply battlefields for contending powers or abstract ideologies. Their fields and villages sustain millions of people whose first desire is for food and shelter and hope of progress. 
Our purpose should not be misunderstood. We do not seek to buy peace. If the price of ending aggression is blood and men, we are ready to pay that price. We do this because it is necessary to the health and independence of the countries of southeast Asia. We do it because it is right in this world that the strong and the wealthy should help the poor and the weak. 
Nor are we neglecting the special needs of battle-torn South Viet-Nam. In the last 10 years we have spent more than $2 billion for economic progress in that area. Yesterday, only yesterday, I sent a team of rural electrification experts to Saigon to help extend the healing miracles of electricity to the Vietnamese countryside. 





208 - The President's News Conference
April 27, 1965
[2.] We are engaged in a crucial struggle in Viet-Nam. Some may consider it a small war, but to the men who give their lives it is the last war and the stakes are high. Independent South Viet-Nam has been attacked by North Viet-Nam. The object of that attack is total conquest. Defeat in South Viet-Nam would deliver a friendly nation to terror and repression. It would encourage and spur on those who seek to conquer all free nations that are within their reach. 
Our own welfare, our own freedom, would be in great danger. This is the clearest lesson of our time. From Munich until today we have learned that to yield to aggression brings only greater threats and brings even more destructive war. To stand firm is the only guarantee of a lasting peace. At every step of the way, we have used our great power with the utmost restraint. We have made every effort possible to find a peaceful solution. We have done this in the face of the most outrageous and brutal provocation against Vietnamese and against Americans alike. 
Through the first 7 months of 1964, both Vietnamese and Americans were the targets of constant attacks of terror. Bombs exploded in helpless villages, in downtown movie theaters, even at the sports fields where the children played. Soldiers and civilians, men and women, were murdered and crippled, yet we took no action against the source of this brutality--North Viet-Nam. 
When our destroyers were attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin, as you will remember last summer, we replied promptly with a single raid. The punishment then was limited to the deed. For the next 6 months we took no action against North Viet-Nam. We warned of danger; we hoped for caution in others. 
Their answer was attack, and explosions, and indiscriminate murder. So it soon became clear that our restraint was viewed as weakness; our desire to limit conflict was viewed as a prelude to our surrender. 
We could no longer stand by while attacks mounted and while the bases of the attackers were immune from reply. Therefore, we began to strike back. But America has not changed her essential position, and that purpose is peaceful settlement. That purpose is to resist aggression. That purpose is to avoid a wider war. 
I say again that I will talk to any government, anywhere, any time, without any conditions, and if any doubt our sincerity, let them test us. Each time we have met with silence, or slander, or the sound of guns. But just as we will not flag in battle, we will not weary in the search for peace. 
So I reaffirm my offer of unconditional discussions. 
We will discuss any subject and any point of view with any government concerned. 
This offer may be rejected, as it has been in the past, but it will remain open, waiting for the day when it becomes clear to all that armed attack will not yield domination over others. 
And I will continue along the course that we have set: firmness with moderation; readiness for peace with refusal to retreat. For this is the same battle which we fought for a generation. Wherever we have stood firm, aggression has been halted, peace has been restored, and liberty has been maintained. This was true under President Truman, under President Eisenhower, under President Kennedy, and it will be true again in southeast Asia
THE PRESIDENT. I think it was very evident from the Baltimore speech that most of the non-Communist countries in the world welcomed the proposal in that speech, and most of the Communist countries found objections with it. I am very hopeful that some ways and means can be found to bring the parties who are interested in southeast Asia to a conference table. Just what those ways and means will be, I do not know. But every day we explore to the limit of our capacity every possible political and diplomatic move that would bring that about

THE PRESIDENT. I said in my opening statement that we went for months without destroying a bridge, or an ammunition depot, or a radar station. Those military targets have been the primary targets that we have attacked. There is no blood in a bridge made of concrete and steel, but we do try to take it out so that people cannot furnish additional troops and additional equipment to kill the people of South Viet-Nam, and to kill our own soldiers. There are not many civilians involved in a radar station, but we do try to make it ineffective so that they cannot plot our planes and shoot our boys out of the skies. 
There are not many individuals involved in an ammunition dump, but we have tried to destroy that ammunition so that it would be exploded in North Viet-Nam and not in the bodies of the people of South Viet-Nam or our American soldiers. 
We have said time and time again that we regret the necessity of doing this, but as long as aggression continues, as long as they bomb in South Viet-Nam, as long as they bomb our sports arenas, and our theaters, and our embassies, and kill our women and our children and the Vietnamese soldiers, several thousand of whom have been killed since the first of the year, we think that we are justified in trying to slow down that operation and make them realize that it is very costly, and that their aggression should cease. 
I do sometimes wonder how some people can be so concerned with our bombing a cold bridge of steel and concrete in North Viet-Nam, but never open their mouths about a bomb being placed in our embassy in South Viet-Nam. The moment that this aggression ceases, the destruction of their bridges and their radar stations and the ammunition that they use on our bodies will cease.
THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't know. I frequently see statements they make that we never heard of. I don't know about the particular report that you mentioned. 
THE PRESIDENT. Our purpose in Viet-Nam is, as you well know, to advise and to assist those people in resisting aggression. We are performing that duty there now. I would not be able to anticipate or to speculate on the conduct of each individual in the days ahead. I think that if the enemy there believes that we are there to stay, that we are not going to tuck our tails and run home and abandon our friends, I believe in due time peace can be observed in that area. 
My objective is to contribute what we can to assist the people of South Viet-Nam who have lost thousands of lives defending their country, and to provide the maximum amount of deterrent with the minimum cost. They have lost thousands of people since February. We have lost some 40 to 50 people of our own. We could not anticipate in February whether we would lose 50 or whether we would lose 500. That depends on the fortunes and the problems of conflict. But I can assure you that we are being very careful--that we are being very studious--that we are being very deliberate--that we are trying to do everything we can within reason to convince these people that they should not attack, that they should not be aggressors, that they should not try to swallow up their neighbor, and we are doing it with the minimum amount of expenditures of lives that we can spend



227 - Remarks to Committee Members on the Need for Additional Appropriations for Military Purposes in Viet-Nam and the Dominican Republic.
May 4, 1965

I have reviewed the situation in Viet-Nam many times with the Congress. I have reviewed it many times with the American people, with the diplomats of the world, and in broadcasts which were reproduced throughout the world. South Viet-Nam has been attacked by North Viet-Nam. It has asked our help. We are giving that help, we are giving it because of ourcommitments, because of our principles, and because we believe that our national interest demands it. 
This is not the same kind of aggression which the world has long been used to. Instead of the sweep of invading armies there is the steady and the deadly attack in the night by guerrilla bands that come without warning, that kill people while they sleep. 
In Viet-Nam we pursue that same principle which has infused American action in the Far East for a quarter of a century. There are those who ask why this responsibility should be ours. The answer, I think, is simple. There is no one else who can do the job. Our power alone in the final test can stand between expanding communism and independent Asian nations. 
Thus when India was attacked it looked to us for help and we gave it immediately. We believe that Asia should be directed by Asians, but that means that each Asian people must have theright to find its own way, not that one group or one nation should overrun all the others. 
Now make no mistake about it, the aim in Viet-Nam is not simply the conquest of the south, tragic as that would be. It is to show that American commitment is worthless and they would like very much to do that, and once they succeed in doing that, the gates are down and the road is open to expansion and to endless conquest. Moreover, we are directly committed to the defense of South Viet-Nam beyond any question. 
In 1954 we signed the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and that treaty committed us to act to meet aggression against South Viet-Nam. The United States Senate was called upon to act upon that treaty. It ratified that treaty and that obligation by roll call vote of 82 to 1. Less than a year ago the Congress, by an almost unanimous vote, a vote of 502 to 2, said that the United States was ready to take all necessarysteps to meet its obligations under that treaty. That resolution in the Congress expressed support for the policy of three successive American Presidents to help the people of South Viet-Nam against attack. Thus, we cannot and we will not and we must not withdraw or be defeated. The stakes are too high, the commitment too deep, the lessons of history too plain. 
We will not use our great power in any reckless or casual manner. We have no desire whatever to expand that conflict. We will do, though, what must be done and we will do only what must be done. For in the long run there can be no military solution to the problems of Viet-Nam and we all realize that. We know that we must find some way, somehow, a path to peaceful settlement, and all the resources and brains of our Government are relentlessly pursuing every possible alternative. 
Time and time and time again we have worked to open that path. As I talk to you this morning our allies are cooperating with us in attempting to open that path and find that solution. As I have said to you so many times and to the American people likewise, we are ready to talk any time, anywhere, with any government without conditions. We will go anywhere. We will discuss any subject. We will listen courteously and patiently to any point of view that may offer possibilities of a peaceful solution. 
You don't know how much I regret the necessity for ever issuing an order to bomb anything, particularly North Viet-Nam. But we began those bombings after I had been in the Presidency some 14 months and only when patience had been transformed from a virtue into a blunder. Time and time and time again, men, women, and children--Americans and Vietnamese alike--were bombed in their villages and their homes while our forces made no reply. There was, last November, an attack on the Dong Hoi airfield. There was the Christmas Eve bombing of the Brinks Hotel in Saigon. There was the February attack at 2 o'clock in the morning, while our American soldiers slept, at Pleiku, where 14 Americans were killed and 269 seriously wounded. 
These are just a few examples of their campaign of terror and attack. We then decided that it was no longer advisable to stand by with our arms folded and see men and women and children murdered and crippled while the bases of these aggressors were immune from reply. But we have no desire to destroy human life. Our attacks have all been aimed primarily at strictly military targets, not hotels, not movie theaters, not American compounds, not embassy buildings. 
We destroy bridges that are made up of steel and concrete and bleed little blood, so it is harder for our adversaries to convey their instruments of war from the north to the south. When they get to a bridge that is blown up they must unload everything they have and if possible in crossing a swift stream, take their ferries, and load it on a ferry, and try to get across and then unload it and load it back again, taking increased time and increased effort and slowing down their aggression. 
We destroy radar stations--some 10 of them--in order to keep them from spotting our planes and shooting down our American pilots. We destroy central depots for the infiltration of men and arms to the south, depots that furnished the manpower that attacked Pleiku. 
We patrol trails in an attempt to halt the invaders. We destroy the ammunition dumps to prevent the use of explosives against our men and our allies. 
Who among us can feel confident that we should allow our soldiers to be killed while the aggressor sits secure in his sanctuary protected by a border which he himself has violated a thousand times or more? Well, I do not believe that is the view of the American people and I hope that is not the view of the American Congress. 
The bombing is not an end in itself, as we all know. Its purpose is to bring us closer to the final day of peace, and whenever it will serve the interests of peace to do so, we will immediately end it. But let us remember, when we began the bombings there was no talk of negotiations. There were few worldwide cries for peace. Some who now speak loudly were content to permit the Americans and the Vietnamese to continue to die and to suffer at the hands of terror without protest. 
Our firmness and the action that we have taken in the last few weeks may well have already brought us much closer to peace. 
The conclusion is plain. We will not surrender. We do not wish to engage in a larger conflict. We desire peaceful settlement and reasonable talks. Yet the aggression continues, although we have sent the adversaries messages of our views day after day. Therefore, I see no choice but to continue the course that we are on, filled as it is with peril and uncertainty and cost in both money and men. I believe the American people support that course. I believe they have learned a great lesson of this generation. Wherever we have stood firm, aggression has ultimately been halted. Peace has ultimately been restored and liberty has been maintained. That was true in Iran; that was true in Greece; that was true in Turkey; it was true in the Formosa Straits; that was true in Lebanon and it was true in Korea. It was true in the Cuban missile crisis and it will be true again in southeast Asia. 
Our people do not flinch from sacrifice or risk when the cause of freedom demands it, and they have the deep and abiding and true instinct of the American people. When our Nation is challenged it must respond. When freedom is in danger we must face up and stand up to that danger. When we are attacked we must not turn tail and run, we must stand and fight
So we can't go north and we shouldn't go south and we can notnegotiate. So what do we do? Well, this is the situation that I inherited. It is the policy that we decreed in 1954. So with the problem confronting me, they are the facts as I see them. I have tried to provide the maximum amount of deterrence to aggression with the minimum loss of life to ourselves and to our allies. That we will continue to do until someway, somehow, we find a civilized solution and a readiness to exchange views across the conference table




246 - Address to Members of the Association of American Editorial Cartoonists: The Challenge of Human Need in Viet-Nam.
May 13, 1965

The war in Viet-Nam has many faces. There is the face of armed conflict--of terror and gunfire--of bomb-heavy planes and campaign-weary soldiers. In this conflict our only object is to prove that force will meet force, that armed conquest is futile, and that aggression is not only wrong, but it just will not work. 
And the Communists in Viet-Nam are slowly beginning to realize what they once scorned to believe: that we combine unlimited patience with unlimited resources in pursuit of an unwavering purpose. 
We will not abandon ourcommitment to South Viet-Nam. 
The second face of war in Viet-Nam is the quest for a political solution, the face of diplomacy and politics, of the ambitions and the interests of other nations. We know, as our adversaries should also know, that there is no purely military solution in sight for either side. 
We are ready for unconditional discussions. Most of the non-Communist nations of the world favor such unconditional discussions. And it would dearly be in the interest of North Viet-Nam to now come to the conference table. For them the continuation of war, without talks, means only damage without conquest.
But, as South Viet-Nam is the central place of conflict, it is also a principal focus of our work to increase the well-being of people. 
It is in that effort in South Viet-Nam which I think we are too little informed and which I want to relate to you this morning. 
We began in 1954 when Viet-Nam became independent, before the war between the North and the South. 
Since that time we have spent more than $2 billion in economic help for the 16 million people of South Viet-Nam. 
And despite the ravages of war we have made steady continuing gains. 
We have concentrated on food, and health, and education, and housing, and industry
Health, education, and housing are the urgent human needs. 
But industrial development is the great pathway to their future. 
When Viet-Nam was divided, most of the industry was in the North
This, then, is the third face of our struggle in Viet-Nam. It was there--the illiterate, the hungry, the sick--before this war began. It will be there when peace comes to us-and so will we. Not with soldiers and planes, not with bombs and bullets, but with all the wondrous weapons of peace in the 30th century. 
And then, perhaps, together, all of the people in the world can share that gracious task with all the people of Viet-Nam, North and South alike



295 - The President's News Conference
June 1, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I don't see that I can do you any good, the country any good, or myself any good by discussing future operational plans. I know of no real reason why we ought to photograph them or decide them until we are confronted with that possibility




319 - The President's News Conference
June 17, 1965

Now, if there is any indication, or anyone has information--I remember one time Senator Borah 9 said he had better information than the President. At that time, Smitty,10 it was a matter of much more point than it is now, and much more equal, I am glad to say. But our information is when we asked them to come into the United Nations last August, after we said you bring these people in and let's try to work through the U.N., they weren't the slightest interested-the North Vietnamese were not
In February, we started the program of trying to curtail their ammunition supply and trying to eliminate their bridges and make it more difficult for them to come in, and attempting to convince them we were there to keep ourcommitment and we were going to keep it although they believed from some things said in word and writing, we might not. We attempted to convince them. 
They told our representatives, our spokesmen, people who were negotiating for us (not members of this Government), and this is an example that I have used in talking to a good many people in the Congress and elsewhere, "this inflexibility characterizes the position of this entire regime, and illustrates its great measure of confidence in itself. It considers it holds all the trump cards; that world opinion is becoming more sympathetic; that the United States retaliation is limited; that South Viet-Nam is having its difficulties and they are not the slightest interested." 
On February 15th, the same man reported to us and just a few days ago, I believe it was June 7. And the message on June 7 was just about the same as the message on February 15. It is a confidential message but I will unclassify a paragraph or two of it for you. 
He is completely persuaded, from his conversations with the officials, they are not now interested in any negotiation of any kind. He said he was able to see he names a high official--and he followed the standard line that the United States offer of unconditional discussion was deceitful. He asked them to elaborate on any proposal they would consider. He remained deliberately vague and gave no clear answer. We pressed him specifically about this matter but only received a vague and very indefinite reply. 
He just talks about being impressed by an American in a foreign country, and he concludes the paragraph that his impressions from all of his meetings and discussions was there has been no change whatever in their position or at least they did not seem about to let such change be known. 
Now, if any of these people want to negotiate they would have no difficulty finding a way. I told them in Baltimore we would like to go and would hope to do, and have repeated it since, and we have indicated many, many times we would be glad to negotiate with any government. Now they are going into groups of people. 
Well, that is the current line. You remember first we had no policy. Second, we wouldn't explain it. Third, we ought to negotiate. Fourth, we ought to have a halt. These things originate and in about a month they come to us. You will find a good deal of it in the next few weeks--negotiate directly with the Viet Cong. And I would say the Viet Cong would have no difficulty, since they are controlled, directed, and masterminded from North Viet-Nam, in getting any view to us they wanted






353 - The President's News Conference
July 13, 1965

The present center of the struggle is in South Viet-Nam, but its root cause is a determined effort of conquest that is directed from Hanoi. Heavy infiltration of North Vietnamese forces has created new dangers and difficulties in South Viet-Nam. Increased aggression from the North may require an increased American response on the ground in South Viet-Nam. Increased aggression from the North continues to require very careful replies against selected military targets in North Viet-Nam. 
Meanwhile, General Westmoreland has the authority to use the American forces that are now in Viet-Nam in the ways which he considers most effective to resist the Communist aggression and the terror that is taking .place there. These forces will defend their own bases. They will assist in providing security in neighboring areas, and they will be available for more active combat missions when the Vietnamese Government and General Westmoreland agree that such active missions are needed. 
So it is quite possible that new and serious decisions will be necessary in the near future. Any substantial increase in the present level of our efforts to turn back the aggressors in South Viet-Nam will require steps to insure that our reserves of men and equipment of the United States remain entirely adequate for any and all emergencies. 
Secretary McNamara and Ambassador Lodge will concern themselves also with the political and economic situation. We have had Mr. Eugene Black visiting southeast Asia and he has given me an oral report on his encouraging visit to that area.4 We mean to make it plain that our military effort is only a necessary preliminary to the larger purpose of peace and progress
THE PRESIDENT. We are very anxious to maintain close relations with the Soviet Union, and we had felt that considerable progress had been made in the last several years. Unfortunately, the situation that developed in North Viet-Nam has placed a strain on those relations. We regret it very deeply, but we have felt that, as I said earlier, our national honor required us to pursue the course of conduct that we have followed

THE PRESIDENT. We would hope that if the North Vietnamese would cease their aggression we could immediately take steps to have the people of South Viet-Nam exercise their choice and establish a government of their choosing. We, of course, would hope that that would be a very efficient and effective and democratic system

THE PRESIDENT. Peter,10 I don't think that we can tell the extent of that agreement and how far it will reach. They gave no figures. They did not explain what materials they were going to supply. We have known for some time now that they are furnishing equipment and they are furnishing supplies and they are making contributions of aid in one form or the other to North Viet-Nam; this is no surprise to us at all

THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't think that the teach-ins and the differences of opinion have increased the strength of the North Vietnamese or the aggression that has taken place. I do think that at times our allies, particularly the South Vietnamese people, and particularly our own soldiers, do get concerned about how strong we are behind them and how united we are in this very serious undertaking


388 - The President's News Conference
July 28, 1965

The answer, like the war itself, is not an easy one, but it echoes clearly from the painful lessons of half a century. Three times in my lifetime, in two World Wars and in Korea, Americans have gone to far lands to fight for freedom. We have learned at a terrible and a brutal cost that retreat does not bring safety and weakness does not bring peace. 
It is this lesson that has brought us to Viet-Nam. This is a different kind of war. There are no marching armies or solemn declarations. Some citizens of South Viet-Nam at times, with understandable grievances, have joined in the attack on their own government. 
But we must not let this mask the central fact that this is really war. It is guided by North Viet-Nam and it is spurred by Communist China. Its goal is to conquer the South, to defeat American power, and to extend the Asiatic dominion of communism. There are great stakes in the balance. Most of the non-Communist nations of Asia cannot, by themselves and alone, resist the growing might and the grasping ambition of Asian communism. 
Our power, therefore, is a very vital shield. If we are driven from the field in Viet-Nam, then no nation can ever again have the same confidence in American promise, or in American protection. 
In each land the forces of independence would be considerably weakened, and an Asia so threatened by Communist domination would certainly imperil the security of the United States itself. 
We did not choose to be the guardians at the gate, but there is no one else. 
Nor would surrender in Viet-Nam bring peace, because we learned from Hitler at Munich that success only feeds the appetite of aggression. The battle would be renewed in one country and then another country, bringing with it perhaps even larger and crueler conflict, as we have learned from the lessons of history. 
Moreover, we are in Viet-Nam to fulfill one of the most solemn pledges of the American Nation. Three Presidents--President Eisenhower, President Kennedy, and your present President--over 11 years have committed themselves and have promised to help defend this small and valiant nation. 
Strengthened by that promise, the people of South Viet-Nam have fought for many long years. Thousands of them have died. Thousands more have been crippled and scarred by war. We just cannot now dishonor our word, or abandon ourcommitment, or leave those who believed us and who trusted us to the terror and repression and murder that would follow
THE PRESIDENT. I do not want to speculate on the reactions of other people. This Nation is prepared, and will always be prepared, to protect its national interest

As I just said, I hope that every member of the United Nations that has any idea, any plan, any program, any suggestion, that they will not let them go unexplored

THE PRESIDENT. No, we have no information as to how they were manned. We cannot speak with any authority on that matter. We made the decision that we felt our national interests required, and as those problems present themselves we will face up to them



463 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 29, 1965

THE PRESIDENT. I don't know where the reports are. I have not seen them, and we hear a lot of reports but so far as I am aware there is nothing official about them, and I expect some newspaperman is speculating



6 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 12, 1966

And they do again tonight in Vietnam. Not too many years ago Vietnam was a peaceful, if troubled, land. In the North was an independent Communist government. In the South a people struggled to build a nation, with the friendly help of the United States

There were some in South Vietnam who wished to force Communist rule on their own people. But their progress was slight. Their hope of success was dim. Then, little more than 6 years ago, North Vietnam decided on conquest. And from that day to this, soldiers and supplies have moved from North to South in a swelling stream that is swallowing the remnants of revolution in aggression. 
As the assault mounted, our choice gradually became clear. We could leave, abandoning South Vietnam to its attackers and to certain conquest, or we could stay and fight beside the people of South Vietnam. We stayed. 
And we will stay until aggression has stopped. 
We will stay because a just nation cannot leave to the cruelties of its enemies a people who have staked their lives and independence on America's solemn pledge--a pledge which has grown through the commitments of three American Presidents. 
We will stay because in Asia and around the world are countries whose independence rests, in large measure, on confidence in America's word and in America's protection. To yield to force in Vietnam would weaken that confidence, would undermine the independence of many lands, and would whet the appetite of aggression. We would have to fight in one land, and then we would have to fight in another--or abandon much of Asia to the domination of Communists. 
And we do not intend to abandon Asia to conquest. 
Last year the nature of the war in Vietnam changed again. Swiftly increasing numbers of armed men from the North crossed the borders to join forces that were already in the South. Attack and terror increased, spurred and encouraged by the belief that the United States lacked the will to continue and that their victory was near. 
Despite our desire to limit conflict, it was necessary to act: to hold back the mounting aggression, to give courage to the people of the South, and to make our firmness clear to the North. Thus. we began limited air action against military targets in North Vietnam. We increased our fighting force to its present strength tonight of 190,000 men. 
These moves have not ended the aggression but they have prevented its success. The aims of the enemy have been put out of reach by the skill and the bravery of Americans and their allies--and by the enduring courage of the South Vietnamese who, I can tell you, have lost eight men last year for every one of ours. 
The enemy is no longer close to victory. Time is no longer on his side. There is no cause to doubt the American commitment. 
Our decision to stand firm has been matched by our desire for peace. 
In 1965 alone we had 300 private talks for peace in Vietnam, with friends and adversaries throughout the world. 
Since Christmas your Government has labored again, with imagination and endurance, to remove any barrier to peaceful settlement. For 20 days now we and our Vietnamese allies have dropped no bombs in North Vietnam. 
Able and experienced spokesmen have visited, in behalf of America, more than 40 countries. We have talked to more than a hundred governments, all 113 that we have relations with, and some that we don't. We have talked to the United Nations and we have called upon all of its members to make any contribution that they can toward helping obtain peace. 
In public statements and in private communications, to adversaries and to friends, in Rome and Warsaw, in Paris and Tokyo, in Africa and throughout this hemisphere, America has made her position abundantly clear. 
We seek neither territory nor bases, economic domination or military alliance in Vietnam. We fight for the principle of self-determination--that the people of South Vietnam should be able to choose their own course, choose it in free elections without violence, without terror, and without fear. 
The people of all Vietnam should make a free decision on the great question of reunification. 
This is all we want for South Vietnam. It is all the people of South Vietnam want. And if there is a single nation on this earth that desires less than this for its own people, then let its voice be heard. 
We have also made it clear--from Hanoi to New York--that there are no arbitrary limits to our search for peace. We stand by the Geneva Agreements of 1954 and 1962. We will meet at any conference table, we will discuss any proposals--four points or fourteen or forty--and we will consider the views of any group. We will work for a cease-fire now or once discussions have begun. We will respond if others reduce their use of force, and we will withdraw our soldiers once South Vietnam is securely guaranteed theright to shape its own future. 
We have said all this, and we have asked-and hoped--and we have waited for a response. 
So far we have received no response to prove either success or failure. 
I wish tonight that I could give you a blueprint for the course of this conflict over the coming months, but we just cannot know what the future may require. We may have to face long, hard combat or a long, hard conference, or even both at once. 
Until peace comes, or if it does not come, our course is clear. We will act as we must to help protect the independence of the valiant people of South Vietnam. We will strive to limit the conflict, for we wish neither increased destruction nor do we want to invite increased danger. 
But we will give our fighting men what they must have: every gun, and every dollar, and every decision--whatever the cost or whatever the challenge. 
And we will continue to help the people of South Vietnam care for those that are ravaged by battle, create progress in the villages, and carry forward the healing hopes of peace as best they can amidst the uncertain terrors of war. 
And let me be absolutely clear: The days may become months, and the months may become years, but we will stay as long as aggression commands us to battle. 
There may be some who do not want peace, whose ambitions stretch so far that war in Vietnam is but a welcome and convenient episode in an immense design to subdue history to their will. But for others it must now be clear--the choice is not between peace and victory, it lies between peace and the ravages of a conflict from which they can only lose. 
The people of Vietnam, North and South, seek the same things: the shared needs of man, the needs for food and shelter and education--the chance to build and work and till the soil, free from the arbitrary horrors of battle--the desire to walk in the dignity of those who master their own destiny. For many painful years, in war and revolution and infrequent peace, they have struggled to fulfill those needs. 
It is a crime against mankind that so much courage, and so much will, and so many dreams, must be flung on the fires of war and death. 
To all of those caught up in this conflict we therefore say again tonight: Let us choose peace, and with it the wondrous works of peace, and beyond that, the time when hope reaches toward consummation, and life is the servant of life




22 - Remarks in Independence, Mo., at a Ceremony in Connection With the Establishment of the Harry S. Truman Center for the Advancement of Peace
January 20, 1966

Now this is the central necessity today of the brave people with whom we are associated in South Vietnam. lust this week, the Prime Minister of Vietnam has pledged his country to this necessity. He has spoken for progress in rural education, in housing, in land reform, and above all, of the need for progress in social revolution and in the building of democracy--by constitutional process and by free elections. All this he has said in the shadow of continuing aggression from the North. In all this he will have the full support of the United States of America



35 - Remarks to Students Participating in the U.S. Senate Youth Program.
January 28, 1966

At this very moment many of your brave young brothers, not much older than yourselves, are locked in bitter combat in the rice paddies of Vietnam. They are there because a few fanatical leaders still belong to the cult of force. Those leaders talk much about building a rich and peaceful Vietnam, but it seems to me that they practice the opposite. They are pursuing the old cynical strategy of rule or ruin. We cannot, and we must not, let that strategy succeed. 
Peace can be restored in Vietnam, restored whenever the Vietcong, and their mentors to the north, are finally convinced that violence is of no avail. We have told them, we have told them time and time again, that we prefer words to bullets, that we would much rather negotiate and talk than fight. We believe that the days when men's problems can be solved on a battlefield are really gone forever, and it is the deepest wish of this Nation that others will some day join us in the only goal which, to us, really makes any sense-the goal of making this planet a safe and a fit place for the human race to live



39 - Statement by the President Announcing Resumption of Air Strikes on North Vietnam.
January 31, 1966

For 37 days, no bombs fell on North Vietnam. During that time, we have made a most intensive and determined effort to enlist the help and the support of all the world in order to persuade the Government in Hanoi that peace is better than war, that talking is better than fighting, and that the road to peace is open. 
Our effort has met with understanding and support throughout most of the world, but not in Hanoi and Peking. From those two capitals have come only denunciation and rejection. 
In these 37 days, the efforts of our allies have been rebuffed. The efforts of neutral nations have come to nothing. We have sought, without success, to learn of any response to efforts made by the governments of Eastern Europe. There has been no answer to the enlightened efforts of the Vatican. Our own direct private approaches have all been in vain. 
The answer of Hanoi to all is the answer that was published 3 days ago. They persist in aggression. They insist on the surrender of South Vietnam to communism. It is, therefore, very plain that there is no readiness or willingness to talk, no readiness for peace in that regime today. 
And what is plain in words is also plain in acts. Throughout these 37 days, even at moments of truce, there has been continued violence against the people of South Vietnam, against their Government, against their soldiers, and against our own American forces. 
We do not regret the pause in the bombing. We yield to none in our determination to seek peace. We have given a full and decent respect to the opinions of those who thought that such a pause might give new hope for peace in the world. 
Some said that 10 days might do it. Others said 20. Now, we have paused for twice the time suggested by some of those who urged it. And now the world knows more clearly than it has ever known before who it is that insists on aggression and who it is that works for peace. 
The Vietnamese, American, and allied troops that are engaged in South Vietnam, with increasing strength and increasing success, want peace, I am sure, as much as any of us here at home. But while there is no peace, those men are entitled to the full support of American strength and American determination--and we will give them both. 
These advisers tell me that if continued immunity is given to all that support North Vietnam aggression, the cost in lives--Vietnamese lives and American lives and allied lives--will only be greatly increased. 
In the light of the words and actions of the Government in Hanoi for more than 37 days now, it is our clear duty to do what we can to limit these costs. 
So on this Monday morning in Vietnam, at my direction, after complete and thorough consultation and agreement with the Government of South Vietnam, United States aircraft have resumed action in North Vietnam. 
They struck the lines of supply which support the continuing movement of men and arms against the people and the Government of South Vietnam. 
Our air strikes on North Vietnam from the beginning have been aimed at military targets and have been controlled with the greatest of care. Those who direct and supply the aggression really have no claim to immunity from military reply. 
The end of the pause does not mean the end of our own pursuit of peace. That pursuit will be as determined and as unremitting as the pressure of our military strength on the field of battle. 
In our continuing pursuit of peace, I have instructed Ambassador Goldberg at the United Nations to ask for an immediate meeting of the United Nations Security Council. He will present a full report on the situation in Vietnam, and a resolution which can open the way to the conference table. 
This report and this resolution will be responsive to the spirit of the renewed appeal of Pope Paul, and that appeal has our full sympathy. 
I have asked Secretary Rusk to meet with the representatives of the press later this morning to give to the country and to the entire world a thorough and a comprehensive account of all of the diplomatic efforts conducted in these last 5 weeks in our continuing policy of peace and freedom for South Vietnam.



52 - The President's News Conference
February 4, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. I don't think there is anything that you don't know about. I reviewed last night here the responses from all of the countries of the world. I pretty well know the measure of public sentiment that we have had. 
But that was a series of circumstances. We would hear something here, and we wanted to be sure that we didn't get Mr. Sevareid 19 confused, and so we would follow it right out to the last inch. 
But by the time we traveled down that road, we would hear some rumor over here, and we would go and follow that one out. By the time you did that with 115 countries and you get them all wrapped up, it takes time. 
Finally, the last a or 3 days we received a note that there was going to be a very urgent message delivered to one of the large powers in a very critical capital, and so we had to wait a couple of days for that. 
The substance of that was the Ho Chi Minh20 letter that had been printed here 2 or 3 days before. So by that time we had used 38 days, and we felt that we had exhausted all of the possibilities there. 
Therefore, we had no real hope of accomplishing anything in these capitals and we were free to pursue other efforts, which we are now pursuing at the United Nations and any other places that may offer possibilities from time to time



86 - Remarks in New York City Upon Receiving the National Freedom Award
February 23, 1966

First, some ask if this is a war for unlimited objectives. The answer is plain. The answer is "no." Our purpose in Vietnam is to prevent the success of aggression. It is not conquest; it is not empire; it is not foreign bases; it is not domination. 
It is, simply put, just to prevent the forceful conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam. 
Second, some people ask if we are caught in a blind escalation of force that is pulling us headlong toward a wider war that no one wants. The answer, again, is a simple "no." We are using that force and only that force that is necessary to stop this aggression. Our fighting men are in Vietnam because tens of thousands of invaders came south before them. Our numbers have increased in Vietnam because the aggression of others has increased in Vietnam. The high hopes of the aggressor have been dimmed and the tide of the battle has been turned, and our measured use of force will and must be continued. But this is prudent firmness under what I believe is careful control. There is not, and there will not be, a mindless escalation. 
Sixth, men ask if we rely on guns alone. Still again the answer is "no." From our Honolulu meeting, from the clear pledge which joins us with our allies in Saigon, there has emerged a common dedication to the peaceful progress of the people of Vietnam--to schools for their children, to care for their health, to hope and bounty for their land. 
The Vice President returned tonight from his constructive and very highly successful visit to Saigon and to other capitals, and he tells me that he and Ambassador Lodge have found a new conviction and purpose in South Vietnam--for the battle against want and injustice as well as the battle against aggression. 
So the pledge of Honolulu will be kept, and the pledge of Baltimore stands open-to help the men of the North when they have the wisdom to be ready



93 - Remarks on the Fifth Anniversary of the Peace Corps at the Swearing In of Jack Hood Vaughn as Director.
March 1, 1966
It has come in Vietnam. We are there in order to restore peace and in order to let the works of peace serve the life of man. 
So to the people of that land--North and South--we acknowledge that there are great differences between our people and our nations. But these gulfs of culture and tradition are spanned by a common humanity and shared needs of man--of food and shelter and education, a decent life for each family, the chance to build and to work and to till the soil free from fear and the arbitrary horrors of battle--and to walk in the dignity of those who have chosen their own destiny. 
It is more than a shame; it is a crime-perhaps the greatest crime of man--that so much courage, and so much will, and so many dreams must be carelessly flung on the fires of death and war. 
The long history of this conflict is filled with misunderstandings and invectives and passions. I think the time has come to strike off the chains of the past so that we may be free to shape anew the future. We should notpermit endless and unrewarding argument over what has already happened to bar us from accomplishing what should happen. 
Peace is within our grasp, if we will both reach for it together, and beyond peace are the wondrous gifts of peace, and beyond that a time when hope can reach unbounded for consummation. 
There may be those who do not want peace, those whose ambitions stretch so far that war in Vietnam is but a welcome and a convenient episode in an immense and doomed design to subdue history to their will. But let them not suppose that our desire for peace springs either from weakness or from hesitation. Our desire for peace springs, rather, from a further recognition of our knowledge that the search for peace also always requires great skill and great courage. 
If there are others, however, who do want peace, and if it is equally true that total victory is beyond expectation for them, as they must now know that it really is, then we think there is only one answer: Negotiate peace and let war stand aside while the people of Vietnam make their choice. For our part, here in America, we are eagerly willing to abide by the outcome. 
We sincerely desire neither territory nor bases in Vietnam, neither economic domination nor military alliance. We fight for the principle that the people of South Vietnam should be able to choose their own course, free from the coercions of violence and terror and fear. We believe that the people of South Vietnam, through the process of elections, can select their own leaders and their own way of life. 
That is the example we have set. That is the procedure we follow in our own land, and all the people of Vietnam can then freely express their will on the great questions of unification and national destiny. 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, that is what your country wants for the people of South Vietnam. That is what the people of South Vietnam, we think, want. So together we seek the day when we can be as generous in peace as we must be determined in battle. We are ready when that day comes, ready to join in a massive effort of reconstruction and development that is open to all, including North Vietnam. 
The Asian Bank, which we suggested in our speech in Baltimore, is only a beginning of what can be done when aggression ends and when men decide that peace and not war should be the testing ground of human experience. That measure has already passed the House and been reported in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee unanimously, and we hope it can be acted upon this week. It will be a great step forward



124 - The President's News Conference Held at the Close of the Governors' Conference
March 12, 1966

I don't want to be positive about that. I was talking to these men, and I'm not giving you a guarantee--[inaudible]--McNamara promise to get out of Vietnam by a certain time. It does have a lot of "ifs" to it. It you are going to publish it at all, you are required to publish all the "ifs." 
Mr. McNamara said, "if we have stable governments," and "if they didn't come in from the North," and if these other things. So I want to point out that if we go along according to our plan, we hope to be under a billion dollars of what I told Congress originally. The budget says $1 billion 400 million in 1965, and $1 billion 200 million in 1964, so those will be the two best predictable years in the history of the Government




128 - Remarks at the Signing of the Supplemental Military Authorization Bill.
March 15, 1966

I believe that many of the world's nations have since learned the final futility of war. Most of the world's leaders today, I believe, genuinely desire peace, but there are still a few who do not. So to those who ask what our present struggle in Vietnam really means, let me say: Our purpose is to demonstrate to the remaining advocates of violence that there is more human profit to be had from peace than there is from war. 
That is the real purpose of the more than 200,000 brave Americans who are at this moment risking their lives 10,000 miles from home. That is the real purpose of the Congress in registering such dramatic support for legislation of this kind. That is the only purpose of the President and this administration in Vietnam. 
How sad it is that such great sums must be spent for the bombs and the planes and the gunpowders of war. How joyous it would be if these great resources could he put, instead, to the service of peace. We have said this and we have repeated it time and time again, and we will never tire of saying it, and I repeat it now: The people of Vietnam, North and South, have the same basic human needs. The people of Asia and the people of China have the same basic human needs. 
They need food, shelter, and education. They need an end to disease and to disaster. They need a future for their children. They need hope. They need peace. These are the very simple things, the basic things, the building blocks of life and of civilization. They are the vital and fundamental things that all men have in common; that all men can together seek and together achieve. 
In my Baltimore declaration of April of last year, I said to the people of the world how much we would welcome taking some of the funds that we are now spending in bombs and bullets and putting in efforts to rid that area of disease and disaster and provide education and training. At that time I recommended the study and the creation of a Southeast Asia Development Bank, which will soon come into being as a result of the efficiency of this Congress. 
So, again, this morning I repeat that we look forward with hope and with prayer to the day when the leaders who provoked and the leaders who continue this aggression in Vietnam will finally abandon their hopeless attempts at conquest. It is my greatest wish to someday stand here and sign another bill, one that is designed to bring progress and fulfillment to a Southeast Asia which is at peace with itself and also at peace with the rest of the world.




158 - The President's News Conference
March 31, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. Well, they are infiltrating into the South, and they are infiltrating in substantial numbers. They have been for some time. I think that is very evident. They are suffering very heavy casualties. They are attempting to find an answer to their problem there. They are bringing in a good many more people than they did in the early days of the conflict out there and for that reason, it has been necessary for us to do likewise. 
But I believe last week they had the second largest week of casualties that the enemy has ever suffered out there. I think that the count of those actually killed by body count, plus those who die, according to our estimate from those wounded, will be in the neighborhood of 50,000 since the first of the year. I get that report each morning. Their dead by body count is in excess of 10,000. Their wounded is something we estimate at more than three times that much. They lose most of their wounded, and we lose less than 1 percent of ours
THE PRESIDENT. We will, as I told you last July, from time to time add to our forces in such numbers as our Joint Chiefs and General Westmoreland 14 may feel is desirable, and as the President may approve




164 - Remarks at a Program in Recognition of Cost Reduction Achievements by the Department of Agriculture.
April 5, 1966

I was talking to the Prime Minister of India. And when I left her and returned to the Mansion I realized that except for the great work that the farmers of America had done, and the great work that the Department of Agriculture had done in counseling, in guiding, and in helping them, that more people would starve in India this year than live in both North Vietnam and South Vietnam. So that's a record that you can be proud of



188 - The President's News Conference
April 22, 1966

If you have any information from them through any of your sources that will encourage me, we would surely welcome it. I think you know how we feel about it. We must continue to hope and try. We will do that through every avenue, but to say to you that there has been any indication from the Vietcong or from North Vietnam that they are ready to cease their aggression, I have to say no. 
They are still determined to swallow up the people of South Vietnam and by force bring them to their knees. I presume they still think they can do it



228 - Remarks at a Democratic Party Dinner in Chicago.
May 17, 1966

Yes, we have learned over the past half century that failure to meet aggression means war, not peace.
In carrying out that policy we have taken casualties in Berlin and Korea, and now in Vietnam. 
We have had 160,000 American casualties from World War II up until Vietnam. Now every morning I look at those casualty figures. I measure them not as statistics, but man by man. 
As of this morning, we lost 1,705 Americans in Vietnam in the year 1966--1,705. But we lost 49,000 last year on our highways. 
But I tell you that if we fail in frustrating this aggression, the war that would surely come in Asia would produce casualties not in the hundreds or seventeen hundreds, but in the hundreds of thousands and perhaps in millions. 
Your Government therefore, under your President, is determined to resist this aggression at the minimum cost to our people, and to our allies, and to the world. 
I do not know what--who men may be trying to influence, and I do not seek to influence any tonight. But I do tell you here and now that we do not seek to enlarge this war, but we shall not run out of it. 
America is determined to meet her commitments tonight, because those commitments are right. 
As I said after a meeting yesterday with Ambassador Lodge just as he was returning to his post of duty:
--We shall continue to struggle against aggression and social misery in South Vietnam;
--We shall use our influence to help this young nation come together and move toward constitutional government;
--We shall seek an honorable peace. Let those though who speak and write about Vietnam say clearly what other policy they would pursue. 
And let them weigh their words carefully. 
Let them remember that tonight there are 300,000 young Americans, our own boys, out there somewhere in Southeast Asia, on the land and on the sea and in the air. They are there fighting to quarantine another aggressor. They are there fighting for the peace of the world. 
And let them remember that there are men on the other side who know well that their only hope for success in this aggression lies in a weakening of the fiber and the determination of the people of America. And so long as I am President, the policy of opposing aggression at minimum cost shall be continued. 
I sent our ambassadors to more than 40 countries. I wrote letters to nearly 120 in the world asking for assistance, asking for peace. My plea was well received in all the nations of the world except the two most concerned, Red China and North Vietnam. 
After 37 long days, while our men in uniform waited and while our planes were grounded on my orders, while our ambassadors went from nation to nation, we finally were forced to the conclusion that the time had not yet arrived when the Government of North Vietnam was willing or could even be persuaded to sit down at a peace table and try to reason these problems out. Therefore, our arguments need to be more persuasive and our determinations need to be more convincing and more compelling than they have been. 
All I can say to you tonight is that the road ahead is going to be difficult. There will be some "Nervous Nellies" and some who will become frustrated and bothered and break ranks under the strain, and some will turn on their leaders, and on their country, and on our own fighting men. There will be times of trial and tension in the days ahead that will exact the best that is in all of us. But I have not the slightest doubt that the courage and the dedication and the good sense of the wise American people will ultimately prevail. They will stand united until every boy is brought home safely, until the gallant people of South Vietnam have their own choice of their own Government. 
More than that, not just that one little country of 14 million people, but more than a hundred other little countries stand tonight and watch and wait. If Americascommitment [orginally Americas; replaced for Yoshikoder] is dishonored in South Vietnam, it is dishonored in 40 other alliances or more that we have made. 
So I leave you with the assurance that we love peace and we seek it every hour of every day. Any person who wishes to test us can give us the time and the date and the place, and he will find us occupying our peace chair at the negotiating table with any government who genuinely and who sincerely wants to talk instead of fight. 



246 - Remarks at a Memorial Day Service in Arlington National Cemetery.
May 30, 1966

The conflict in South Vietnam is confusing for many of our people. 
The aggression there does not take the form of organized divisions marching brazenly and openly across frontiers. 
It takes the form of men and equipment coming down from the North on foot or in trucks, through jungle roads and trails, or on small craft moving silently through the water at night. 
It takes the form of well-organized assassination, kidnaping, intimidation of innocent citizens in remote villages. Last year, more than 12,000 South Vietnamese civilians were murdered or kidnaped by terrorists. 
That kind of aggression is just as real and just as dangerous for the safety and independence of the people of South Vietnam as was the attack on South Korea in June of 1950. 
Without the flow of men and equipment from the North, the war would soon end. But what our people see looks on the surface to some of them more like a civil war than external aggression. 
Peace will never come to the world if the outcome of this kind of aggression--insurgency mounted from outside a nation--is accepted as a substitute or tantamount to free elections.
We have sought to bring the conflict in Vietnam from the battlefield to the conference table. Twice we have stopped the bombings of military targets in North Vietnam as a sign of our desire to negotiate. And we waited and listened for 37 days--to get no satisfactory reply

We have sought the help of the United Nations in arranging international peace talks. 
We have sent emissaries to more than 40 nations asking them to urge our adversaries to reason with us. 
We have sent word privately to Hanoi and to Peking of our willingness to talk without conditions. 
We have told them that there are ways to end the bloodshed.
Nothing has happened. 
Infiltration from the North has continued at an even higher pace. The fighting, as we speak, goes on. The infiltration is stepped up. The hordes come marching in.
So, until peace comes, or the Communists are willing to talk about peace, we must persevere




277 - The President's News Conference
June 18, 1966

[7.] In the past few weeks the battle in Vietnam has become more intense. The large forces infiltrated from the North into South Vietnam in recent months are now being engaged--sometimes at their initiative, sometime at ours. The forces of South Vietnam, the United States, and our allies have responded with skill, courage, and effectiveness. 
During this period my advisers and I have--almost on a daily basis--continued closely to examine and to scrutinize what the aggressor has been doing and our own course of action. 
We have examined the alternatives open to us--including all suggestions from those who have not shared our views. 
In the light of the full information available to the President of the United States, we sincerely feel that the national interest requires that we persist in our present policy. That policy is to bring to bear the ground, naval, and air strength required to achieve our objective. 
I must observe that this does not mean that we shall not increase our forces or our operations. It is not good national policy publicly to declare to those conducting aggression that there are particular limits on how we shall act to defeat that aggression. 
But our objectives remain what they have been:
--to guarantee that infiltration, subversion, and terror mounted and infiltrated from North Vietnam cannot swallow or conquer South Vietnam;
--to permit the people of South Vietnam to select their own government and to build a way of life which conforms to their own traditions and desires. 
In meeting this objective, we must also reassure the world that America's agreements, once they are made, are not broken. 
We are not fighting to remain in South Vietnam, not to hold bases there, not to control the affairs of that people. 
We are there to defeat aggression, to permit a young nation to develop its own destiny, to help its people rebuild and create a modern nation even before the guns go silent. 
But to these limited objectives we are fully committed.
What are our prospects? 
I must frankly tell you that our intelligence indicates that the aggressor presently bases his hopes, we think, more on political differences in Saigon and Washington than on his military capacity in South Vietnam. While we have differences and divisions, I want our men in the field and our people at home to know that our course is resolute, that our conviction is firm, and we shall not be diverted from doing what is necessary in the Nation's interest and the cause of freedom. 
By every evidence available to us, the majority of the people of South Vietnam seem determined to fight for theright to work out their own affairs. They want to go forward with economic reform, with greater social justice, and a constitutional government. 
They must do this in the midst of a bitter and ugly war. Since January 1, 1966, we have lost 2,200 of our men; the South Vietnamese have lost 4,300 of their men; our allies have lost 250 of their men. 
But the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese have lost three times our combined losses. They have lost 22,500 of their men. 
Our attacks on military targets in North Vietnam have imposed a growing burden on those who support the insurgency in the South. We must continue to raise the cost of aggression at its source. And that is the sole purpose of our use of air strength against selected military targets. 
Here in the United States I believe our people are determined to see this through. In recent primaries, not one candidate for Congress was able to make opposition to the resistance of aggression in South Vietnam a successful position. And more than 125 have now been passed upon by their constituencies. A minority of our people are willing to pull out. Another minority are prepared to see us use our total power. The rest of us, while we may debate this or that dimension of policy, are determined that this Nation honor its responsibility, and its commitment, to help Vietnam turn back aggression from the North. 
We must go forward as nations and men have always gone forward in dark moments, confident that when they are right they will prevail. I am confident that we shall gain an honorable peace in South Vietnam. 
There are, I believe, very few governments among the more than 120 in the world who do not wish to see an honorable peace at the earliest possible moment. To those few I would say this:
There is honor for all in making peace. Let the killing stop. 
As the Government of Vietnam said in the Declaration of Honolulu,8 "stop killing your brothers, sisters, their elders and their children --come and work through constitutional democracy to build together . . . a life of dignity, freedom and peace .... "
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think I would want to comment on the tactics or strategy at this point. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have to be guided by my best judgment in the matter. I will have to do that
THE PRESIDENT. I have no information that I could make available that would give you any encouragement.

THE PRESIDENT. I think you just have to take the statement and read it. We will stand on it. I would not want to get boxed in by a commitment to the New York Times that I would do this or that. I would want to feel at liberty to do whatever the national policy required, as I said in the statement. 
And I think it is very clear on that, when you have a chance to read it. I know you would want your country to have some flexibility in case our national interests required it. If it does, I assure you we will exercise it





311 - "Two Threats to World Peace" - Remarks in Omaha on the Occasion of the Sending of the Five-Millionth Ton of Grain to India
June 30, 1966

That is what is happening at this hour in South Vietnam. The North Vietnamese are trying to deny the people of South Vietnam theright to build their own nation, theright to choose their own system of government, theright to live and to work in peace. 
To those people in America who say they have never had this thing explained to them, I want to repeat that again. 
The North Vietnamese at this hour are trying to deny the people of South Vietnam theright to build their own nation, theright to choose their own system of government, theright to go and vote in a free election and select their own people, theright to live and work in peace. 
South Vietnam has asked us for help. Only if we abandon our respect for therights of other people could we turn down their plea. 
Second, South Vietnam is important to the security of the rest of all of Asia. 
A few years ago the nations of free Asia lay under the shadow of Communist China. They faced a common threat, but not in unity. They were still caught up in their old disputes and dangerous confrontations. They were ripe for aggression.
Now that picture is changing. 
Shielded by the courage of the South Vietnamese, the peoples of free Asia today are driving toward economic and social development in a new spirit of regional cooperation. 
All you have to do is look at that map and you will see independence growing, thriving, blossoming, and blooming.
They are convinced that the Vietnamese people and their allies are going to stand firm against the conqueror, or against aggression. 
Our fighting in Vietnam, therefore, is buying time not only for South Vietnam, but it is buying time for a new and a vital, growing Asia to emerge and develop additional strength. 
If South Vietnam were to collapse under Communist pressure from the North, the progress in the rest of Asia would be greatly endangered. And don't you forget that! 
The third reason is, what happens in South Vietnam will determine--yes, it will determine--whether ambitious and aggressive nations can use guerrilla warfare to conquer their weaker neighbors. 
It will determine whether might makes right. 
Now I do not know of a single more important reason for our presence than this. 
We are fighting in South Vietnam a different kind of war than we have ever known in the past. 
Today in South Vietnam we are witness to another kind of armed aggression. 
It is a war that is waged by men who believe that subversion and guerrilla warfare, transported across international boundaries, can achieve what conventional armies could not. 
They believe that in the long run a modern scientific and industrial nation such as ours is helpless to defend a smaller and weaker country against the imported terror of guerrilla warfare. 
That is what is going on there. The Communist guerrillas, the Vietcong, choose their targets carefully. They aim at the heart of a struggling nation by murdering the schoolteachers, by murdering the agricultural extension workers, by killing the health workers, by assassinating the mayors and their families. 
In 1965 alone the Communists killed or kidnaped 12,000 South Vietnamese civilians. That is equivalent to wiping out the entire population of Columbus, Nebraska, or Alliance County, or one out of every 25 citizens that live in this great city of Omaha. 
If, by such methods, the agents of one nation can go out and hold and seize power where turbulent change is occurring in another nation, our hope for peace and order will suffer a crushing blow all over the world. It will be an invitation to the would-be conqueror to keep on marching. That is why the problem of guerrilla warfare-the problem of Vietnam--is a very critical threat to peace not just in South Vietnam, but in all of this world in which we live. 
Let there be no doubt about it: Those who say this is merely a South Vietnamese "civil war" could not be more wrong. The warfare in South Vietnam was started by the Government of North Vietnam in 1959.
It is financed, it is supported, by an increasing flow of men and arms from the North into the South. 
It is directed and it is led by a skilled professional staff of North Vietnamese, and it is supported by a very small minority of the population of South Vietnam. 
The military tactics are different. The nature of the fighting is different. But the objective is the same as we found it in Korea. The objective is what? The objective is to conquer an independent nation by the force and power of arms. Might makes right, so think these Communist invaders. 
Well, the war took a new turn in 1964. The North Vietnamese decided to step up the conflict in the hope of an early victory. They recruited and drafted more young men from the Communist areas in the South. 
They slipped across the borders of South Vietnam more than three divisions of the North Vietnamese Regular Army. Today there are more than three North Vietnamese divisions fighting in South Vietnam. 
They built all-weather roads. The trails turned into boulevards to replace the jungle trails that they had once used. 
They began sending troops in by trucks rather than on foot. 
They shifted over to heavy weapons, using imported ammunition, most of it coming from Communist China. 
By any definition you want to use--any definition--any lawyer can tell you this: This is armed aggression, the philosophy that might makes right. 
Well, America's purpose is to convince North Vietnam that this kind of aggression is too costly, that this kind of power cannot succeed. 
We have learned from their prisoners, their defectors, and their captured documents that the Hanoi government really thought a few months ago that conquest was in its grasp. But the free men have rallied to prevent this conquest from succeeding. 
In the past 15 months our actions and those of our fighting allies of Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines, and the courage of the people of South Vietnam, have already begun to turn the tide. 
The casualties of the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese forces are three times larger than those of the South Vietnamese and their allies. 
Battle after battle is being won by the South Vietnamese and by the troops under that gallant leader from the United States of America, General "Westy" Westmoreland. He is getting some military advice on the side from some of our armchair generals in the United States, but it looks to me like he is doing pretty good using his own judgment. 
The air attacks on military targets in North Vietnam have imposed, and will continue to impose, a growing burden and a high price on those who wage war against the freedom of their neighbors. 
In the South the Vietnamese are determined that their own economic development, their own social reform and political progress cannot wait until the war ends, so they are now moving toward constitutional government. 
For the past 2 months the political struggles in South Vietnam have been dramatized in our newspapers. They have been published on our television screen every day. 
But all during this time, the Vietnamese citizens, representing every important group in the society, have been quietly meeting in orderly assembly. They have formulated rules for their elections. The rules have been accepted with only minor modifications by the government in Saigon. 
And in the provinces and villages, the Vietnamese have gone on building schools for their children, improving health facilities and agricultural methods, and taking the first steps toward land reform. 
So we can take heart from all of this. We are backing the Vietnamese not only in their determination to save their country; we are supporting their determination to build, to construct, a modern society in which the government will be their government, reflecting the will of the people of South Vietnam. 
Our objective in Vietnam is not war. Our objective is peace. 
There is nothing that we want in North Vietnam. There is nothing we want from North Vietnam. 
There is nothing that we want in Communist China. There is nothing the American people want from Communist China. 
We have made it very clear by every means at our disposal that we wish the killing to stop. 
We have made it very clear that we wish negotiations to begin on the basis of international agreements made in 1954 and 1962. 
For 37 long days we halted bombing in the North in the hope that the government in Hanoi would signal its willingness to talk instead of fight. But I regret to tell you that no signal came during those 37 days. 
In many more ways than I can now tell you here in Omaha, we have explored and we are continuing to explore avenues to peace with North Vietnam. 
But as of this moment, their only reply has been to send more troops and to send more guns into the South. 
Until the day they decide to end this aggression and to make an honorable peace, I can assure you that we, speaking for the United States of America, intend to carry on. 
No one knows how long it will take. Only Hanoi can be the judge of that. No one can tell you how much effort it will take. None can tell you how much sacrifice it will take. No one can tell you how costly it will be. 
But I can, and I do here and now, tell you this: The aggression that they are conducting will not succeed. The people of South Vietnam will be given the chance to work out their own destiny in their own way, and not at the point of a bayonet or with a gun at their temple
Well, if they think that, they are wrong. To those who would try to pressure us or influence us, mislead us or deceive us, I say this afternoon, there can be only one decision in Vietnam, and that is this: We will see this through. We shall persist. We shall succeed. 
Other Presidents have made the commitment. I have reaffirmed it. The Congress has confirmed it. I plan to do all that I can in my own limited way to see that we notpermit 14 million innocent men, women, and children to fall victims to a savage aggression. 
There are many nations, large and small, whose security depends on the reliability of the word and the reliability of the power of the United States. The word of the United States must remain a trust that men can live by, can live with, and can depend upon. 
Some day we will all work as friends and neighbors to grow more food, to build more schools, to heal the sick, to care for the old, to encourage the young. 
We have programs in that direction in the United States going on now, and we are not going to junk them. But we are not going to tuck our tail and run out of South Vietnam either. 
History is not made by nameless forces. History is made by men and women, by their governments and their nations. 
This Nation, working with others, must demonstrate in Vietnam that ourcommitment to freedom and peace is not a fragile thing. It can--and it will--sustain the major test and any test that may confront it. 
With your support, with your prayers, with your faith, I intend to honor the responsibility and to be true to the trust of the office to which you elected me, and to preserve freedom in this country; to keep ourcommitments; to honor our treaties; and let the rest of the world know that when America gives its word, America keeps its word.


320 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
July 5, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. The evaluations that we have, and they are still coming in--we have new pictures that are being analyzed at this moment--the evaluations that we have indicate that about 86 percent of the known petroleum storage capacity in North Vietnam was hit the other evening in a very accurate target operation over the POL targets in the vicinity of Hanoi and Haiphong. 
The latest estimate of the storage capacity actually destroyed that has come in from the field is 57 percent. 
In other words, 86 percent of the storage was hit; 57 percent they estimate is destroyed. 
I cannot embrace those figures because the pictures are not complete. But the general officers who have reviewed this told me this morning that they think both estimates are within reason, and they think it was a very successful operation. 
I think that every general officer carrying responsibilities, either in Vietnam or in the Pentagon, as well as most of our career, experienced, diplomatic observers, think that this action at this time was required by the events of the time





325 - Remarks to the American Alumni Council: United States Asian Policy.
July 12, 1966

As long as the leaders of North Vietnam really believe that they can take over the people of South Vietnam by force, we just must not let them succeed. 
We must stand across their path and say: "You will not prevail; but turn from the use of force and peace will follow." 
Every American must know exactly what it is that we are trying to do in Vietnam. Our greatest resource, really, in this conflict-our greatest support for the men who are fighting out there--is your understanding. It is your willingness to carry, perhaps for a long time, the heavy burden of a confusing and costly war. 
We are not trying to wipe out North Vietnam. 
We are not trying to change their government. 
We are not trying to establish permanent bases in South Vietnam. 
And we are not trying to gain one inch of new territory for America. 
Then, you say, "Why are we there?" Why? 
Well, we are there because we are trying to make the Communists of North Vietnam stop shooting at their neighbors:
--because we are trying to make this Communist aggression unprofitable;
--because we are trying to demonstrate that guerrilla warfare, inspired by one nation against another nation, can never succeed. Once that lesson is learned, a shadow that hangs over all of Asia tonight will, I think, begin to recede. 
"Well," you say, "when will that day come?" I am sorry, I cannot tell you. Only the men in Hanoi can give you that answer. 
We are fighting a war of determination. It may last a long time. But we must keep on until the Communists in North Vietnam realize the price of aggression is too high-and either agree to a peaceful settlement or to stop their fighting. 
However long it takes, I want the Communists in Hanoi to know where we stand. 
First, victory for your armies is impossible. You cannot drive us from South Vietnam by your force. Do not mistake our firm stand for false optimism. As long as you persist in aggression, we are going to resist. 
Second, the minute you realize that a military victory is out of the question and you turn from the use of force, you will find us ready and willing to reciprocate. We want to end the fighting. We want to bring our men back home. We want an honorable peace in Vietnam. In your hands is the key to that peace. You have only to turn it.




338 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. The United States has made clear to the Government of India and to all other governments that at any time the Government of North Vietnam is willing to sit down at the conference table and discuss ways and means of obtaining peace in the world, that on a few hours' notice the United States will be there. 
My closest representative is ready and willing and anxious at any time to enter into those discussions. 
I do not think that we should spend all of our time, though, examining what the Government of the United States might be willing to do without any regard to what the enemy might be willing to do. 
We have stated again and again our desire to engage in unconditional discussions and I repeat them again today. 
But we can't talk about just half the war. We should talk about all the war, and we have not the slightest indication that the other side is willing to make any concession, to take any action that would lead to the peace table. 
And until there is some indication on their part, we, of course, would not expect to tie the hands of our men in Vietnam
I look with favor upon the general suggestion made. There is nothing that we would welcome more than for Hanoi to be willing to stop its infiltration and stop trying to gobble up its neighbor; to permit those people to engage in self-determination and select their own government. We generally approve of the sentiment expressed in the Saigon statement as I interpreted it

THE PRESIDENT. John, I have tried to give my viewpoint and the viewpoint of this Government on the men who have been captured. I would hope that they would receive humane treatment in accordance with the principles of the Geneva Convention of 1949. 
I believe that any other treatment accorded them would notbeaccepted by the civilized world. And I do not want to make any predictions or speculations about what will happen. 
I have expressed my viewpoint on what should happen
On the military front, our troops under General Westmoreland 14 are giving an excellent account of themselves. They are attempting to anticipate the enemy and doing everything they can to deter him from further aggression, from additional infiltration, and from the terror that he practices. 
14Gen. William C. Westmoreland, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam. 
The results have been that the enemy has lost about 10 men for every loss the Americans have suffered. 
I believe the record for the last 10 weeks shows that the enemy has lost in excess of 1,000 men each week. Our average has been something like 100. This week I believe it is less than 100, and I believe theirs is more than 1,200. 
The mail that I get, some 50 or 60 letters from the battlefront each week, shows the morale is high, that the men are well trained, that they are well and adequately supplied, and properly led. 
We ceased speculating a long time ago on how long this situation would endure. But I have said to you and to the American people time and again, and I repeat it today, that we shall persist. 
We shall send General Westmoreland such men as he may require and request, and they will be amply supplied. I have no doubt but what they will give a good account of themselves. 
Overall, I would say that the reports from the captured prisoners--and there have been about twice as many defectors so far this year as there were the same period last year, some 10,000 compared to 4,000--but the interviews from a sample of 150 this week indicate that about 15 to 20 percent of the men that have been captured show that they are boys from 12 to 16 years of age. 
They show that a good many of their people take 3 months in the infiltration, walking down from North Vietnam, that a good many of them are suffering from malaria, and beriberi, and other diseases. 
The men who conducted the bombings on the military targets, the oil supplies of Hanoi and Haiphong, did a very careful but very perfect job. They hit about 90 percent of the total capacity of that storage, and almost 70 percent of it was destroyed. 
Our reports indicate that there were few civilian lives lost, if any. One estimate was that one civilian was killed, and he was the one that was at the alarm center. 
We were very careful not to get out of the target area, in order not to affect civilian populations. But we are going, with our allies, to continue to do everything that we can to deter the aggressor and to go to the peace table at the earliest possible date



346 - Remarks in Indianapolis at a Ceremony Marking the 150th Anniversary of the State of Indiana.
July 23, 1966

I came to say, and I did say, and I quote: "Our military might is greater than that of all the other nations of the world combined. But we must be wise as well as strong. We must be reasonable and never rash. We must be intelligent and never impulsive. We must be resolute but never reckless."
That is still good American policy. But the world has changed since 1964. The Communist leaders in North Vietnam listened with only one ear as we spoke. They heard only half of what we said. They misjudged our deep desire for peace as a sign that they could take over South Vietnam while we looked the other way. 
They heard us say: "The most important thing to you is whether we have peace in the world." 
But they did not hear us say: "in order to have peace we must have strength." 
They heard us say: "We are going to keep our hand out." 
But they did not hear us say: "We are going to keep our guard up." 
They heard us say: "We do not want war; we do not believe in rattling our rockets or talking about dropping our bombs." 
But they did not hear us say: "We must always be alert." 
They heard us say: "The cause is much too great to be reckless." 
But they did not hear us say: "The stakes are much too high to be negligent." 
And so they acted. They pushed the accelerator of aggression to the floorboard. They drove straight for their destination: the independent nation of South Vietnam. 
What would have happened if we had let them get there? 
II. 
First, the people of South Vietnam would be living against their will under the Communist regime of Hanoi. The evidence is clear:
--The guerrilla war in South Vietnam was inspired by Hanoi;
--It was organized in Hanoi;
--It is directed in Hanoi;
--And it is today being supplied from Hanoi. 
If success had come, then the spoils would have gone to Hanoi. South Vietnam would be securely in the orbit of the Communists. They would have cut South Vietnam in half by the middle of last year. By now they could have really finished the job. 
When the Communists took over North Vietnam, more than a million people--double the city population of the great city of Indianapolis; one-fourth of the entire population of the great State of Indiana--packed up and went south to live. They voted against communism the only way they were permitted to vote--with their feet. 
Their journey and their agony would have been in vain if the Communists conquer the South. 
So, in South Vietnam almost a million people have moved out of their villages to escape the terror of the Vietcong. They are living as refugees until they can return to their homes. 
They would never be safe if the Communists move in. 
Since 1959, when serious fighting began on orders from Hanoi, the South Vietnamese have already suffered more than 100,000 casualties. The United States would have had to lose 1,400,000 people, on a proportionate basis, to equal their sacrifice. 
But it would all have been in vain if the United States had abandoned Vietnam. 
So I ask all of those who wonder if South Vietnam is "worth it" to think about what would have happened to the millions of South Vietnamese who want to build their own country. 
They may not look like we do. They don't speak the same language that we do. They may not even think like we do. But they are human beings. We promised them, by treaty, to help protect their independence. And America doesn't break its promises. We are going to stay there. 
If the American people need any reminder of the kind of enemy we face, the kind of enemy that seeks to take over South Vietnam, they can read reports this morning in their morning paper, they can hear it over their radio--where the Vietcong attacked, on yesterday, the United States Naval Hospital in Danang. 
At least three of our men who were patients in that hospital were injured. That is typical of the way the Communists fight. Because they cannot hope to win on the battlefield, they rely on terror and on attacks against the wounded and the innocent. 
There are people who denounce air strikes against oil depots in North Vietnam in my own country; but they remain strangely silent when the Communists in the South turn their mortars on an American hospital or blow up a bus load of farmers or murder the mayor of a Vietnamese town. I just wish they would ask themselves if their standard of judgment is really fair. 
Second, a victory by the Communists in South Vietnam will be followed by new ambitions in Asia. 
The Communists have taught us that aggression is like hunger--it obeys no law but its own appetite. For this reason they have gambled heavily on success in the South. 
The leaders of free Asian nations know this better than anyone. If South Vietnam falls, then they are the next targets. North Vietnam's effort to impose its own system on South Vietnam is a new form of colonialism. The free nations of Asia want it stopped now. And many of them are standing there by our side, helping us stop them now. 
Third, a Communist victory in South Vietnam would inspire new aggression in the rest of the world. 
Listen to me while I repeat the words of North Vietnam's top military commander. I want you to hear what he says: 
"The war has become"--in his words-"the model of the national liberation movement of our time. If the special warfare that the United States imperialists are testing in South Vietnam is overcome, then it can be defeated anywhere in the world." 
Let me repeat to you those last words: "... it can be defeated anywhere in the world." 
Now what he really means is this: If guerrilla warfare succeeds in Asia, it can succeed in Africa. It can succeed in Latin America. It can succeed anywhere in the world. 
The Communist attack in Korea failed in the 1950's. It failed because the world clearly saw that it was aggression and the world rallied to defeat it. 
The Communist attack of the 1960's is different. Armies do not now march across borders in force. They steal in through the night. They drop grenades into markets. They plant land mines in the hearts of villages. They kidnap the mayors of small provincial towns. They kill the schoolteachers and the leaders. 
If they get away with this in South Vietnam, they will try it somewhere else--anywhere in the world. 
So far their adventures in aggression have not worked. 
These have been discouraging setbacks for the militant Communists who have an eye on other people's freedom. But I assure you today: nothing would bring new heart to their cause quicker than a Communist success in South Vietnam.
And that just must not happen. 
I have come here today to join you in this great heartland of America to declare to the people of this country and to the people of all the world that it just will not ever happen. 
We are not going to run out on South Vietnam. We are not going to break America's word. However long it takes, we will persist until the Communists end the fighting or until we negotiate an honorable peace.



348 - Remarks at the Headquarters of the 101st Airborne Division, Fort Campbell, Kentucky.
July 23, 1966

Our men entered the war at a very difficult moment. The South Vietnamese were hard-pressed. The Vietcong and the North Vietnamese had the initiative. They were attacking in every province with a sharp confidence of victory written all over their faces. 
The initiative is no longer with the enemies of freedom. The initiative is with us. 
This must have surprised no one so much as it surprised the leaders in Hanoi. We now know from their captured documents that the troops from North Vietnam were taught that we Americans were soft. They thought our men could not face the trials of a guerrilla war. They thought our troops would not stand up in close combat. 
I suspect at this very hour someone yonder in Hanoi is now busy revising those estimates
But the oppressor still seeks power over the lives of men and women who yearn only to lead peaceful lives, to be left alone, to raise their children in freedom and to give them a better life. 
Our soldiers and marines and airmen have seen the work of the Vietcong in the villages of Vietnam. They have seen the assassination and the kidnaping of local officials, the burning of schools, the terror and the intimidation by night. 
They have seen the soldiers of South Vietnam--600,000 strong--still fighting, still fighting after more than a generation of brutal warfare in their homeland. They see them still bearing the brunt of the struggle. And they see them still taking most of the casualties. 
They have come to know that peace and freedom for Vietnam cannot be won by weapons alone.
They know that even as they make a military conquest impossible for the Communist forces in the field, our diplomats are now probing--searching for a way to make an honorable peace seem desirable to the Communist leaders in Hanoi. 




350 - Remarks in Vincennes, Indiana, Upon Signing Bill Establishing the George Rogers Clark National Historical Park.
July 23, 1966

So we look today to the conflict that rages in far away Vietnam, where our men and our flag arecommitted. We are confident enough to believe that from the long travail of that land will emerge a free and a hopeful nation. We are wise enough, I hope, to know that more fighting, more trouble, and more uncertainty lie ahead before its aspirations are fulfilled. 
I cannot give you this evening an assurance of the hour or the day when this conflict will end. I can assure you that we have sent word to North Vietnam, through every means available to us, of our earnest willingness to negotiate the terms of peace. Twice, with great doubt, with reluctance, but with hope and with prayer, we stopped our bombing to the North to signal to the entire world our plea and our prayer and our hope for peace. We waited 37 long days while our President sent representatives to 40 nations but the answer we received from Hanoi was always the same story: a stony and contemptuous reply while more battalions were sent into their neighbor's land to join the fighting to kill their neighbors and to kill our soldiers. 
We shall continue to try to persuade Hanoi that we would rather talk than fight; that negotiation is desirable. My closest associates will, in a matter of hours, join any representatives they select to sit down at any table in any room in any place to attempt to find a solution by negotiation. But I pledge you, too, that we shall continue if they refuse to negotiate, to make them pay a high price for their warfare in the South on South Vietnam and on our men. 
You hear every day, "Why don't we stop our bombing?" We haven't bombed any embassy in Hanoi. They bombed our embassy in Saigon. We haven't bombed any hospitals in Hanoi. They bombed and injured some of your American boys in a hospital in South Vietnam today. 
I doubt that you will hear many speeches in this country, I doubt that you will see many columns written, I doubt that many commentators will spend very much time lecturing them for the bombs that they dropped on our hospitals. 
I know in the dead of night when they killed our men in their barracks while they slept at 2 o'clock in the morning, the only speeches I heard from all corners coming into the White House the next day was against our Government. 
Why didn't we stop bombing? Well, I thought the most effective answer I have ever seen was given by John Steinbeck when he answered that Russian friend of his who wrote him and asked him to get us to stop bombing. He said, "I want to stop bombing. I want to stop the war on both sides. But I don't want to talk about half a war. I want to talk about all the war." 
So when you hear these voices in the days to come, the men who exercise theright to dissent, f hope you will ask yourselves the question: "I just wonder why we don't talk about all the war? I just wonder why they are so anxious to get us to stop bombing to protect our men and they never say a word about stopping them from infiltrating and killing our men? Why don't we talk about both sides sitting down?" Your President is ready. 
I hope in the days to come that you will just stop, look, and listen as you hear these voices talking about what is wrong with your country, what is wrong with your Government, what is wrong with our men, what mistakes we have made. And ask them if they won't give a little equal time to point out just could it be that the other side has made some mistakes, too? 
So let us leave clearly undisputed, without any question or doubt, these thoughts with you this evening: This Communist aggression will not succeed in South Vietnam any more than it succeeded anywhere else in the world. We shall not ever retreat. We shall not break our word to the people of South Vietnam




397 - Remarks at a Navy League Luncheon, Manchester, New Hampshire.
August 20, 1966

I said here in Manchester 2 years ago that we must stand firm when the vitalinterests of freedom are under attack. I said we must use our power, our overwhelming power, always with judgment and restraint. 
We are trying to follow that policy in Vietnam because we know that the restrained use of power has for more than 21 years prevented the wholesale destruction that the world faced in 1914 and faced again in 1939. 
Every war, large or small, is brutal and is ugly and claims its toll in lives and in fortunes. And we can pray that one day even "limited war" will be an archaic term. But until communism finally abandons aggression, until it is willing to let the rest of the world live in peace without invading them, until then we must be prepared to deal with them and to resist that aggression. 
Our hope is that the North Vietnamese will soon realize that they cannot succeed in taking over South Vietnam and they will turn to the task of helping their own people and building their own nation, in which event we will turn our energies in that area of the world to helping the people of that undeveloped section to become strong in body and in mind. In that work of peaceful building, they will all find the United States of America as willing to help as they found us determined to resist aggression. 
Our quarrel is not with the people of North Vietnam. 
Our resistance is against those in power in Hanoi who seek to conquer the South. We are more than eager to let North Vietnam live in peace if it will only let South Vietnam do the same. Both publicly and privately we have let the leaders of the North know, as clearly as we can express ourselves, that if they will stop sending troops into South Vietnam, we will immediately stop bombing military targets in their country. 
Our objective is to let the people of South Vietnam decide what kind of government and what kind of country they want. They cannot do this while armed troops from North Vietnam are waging war against their people and against their villages. 
There are people who think that the conflict in Vietnam is just an American war. Nothing could be farther from the fact. You realize this, I think, when you consider the effort that this small, torn country is making at this moment. 
South Vietnam is 50,000 square miles smaller than New England; its population is about the same as New York's. But the per capita income of New England is more than 25 times the per capita income of South Vietnam. 
Yet the people of South Vietnam have sustained a bitter and a violent struggle against an enemy within and without for many, many years--their army has suffered more than 40,000 killed in action since 1960, and more than three times that many wounded. And even in the midst of war, South Vietnam is still trying to hold elections, still trying to move toward a government to be chosen by their people. This is not an easy task, and it will not happen overnight, but let us not forget that we are trying. And let us not forget that we hope it is happening in September. 
The Communists do not want--now that they see these elections are being held--they do not want the people to express themselves and they do not want to see an election succeed. So what are they doing? 
As we meet here this hour, they are stepping up their well-planned war against innocent people. We can expect more intimidation and we can expect more terror as the September election draws near. 
I hope the leaders who help to mold public sentiment in this country and I hope the press media will see that these activities are put in a goldfish bowl so that all of our people can observe the tactics that they resort to--in assassinations, in terror, in infiltrations, in the massacres--in order to keep people from having a chance to vote in an election. 
We can also expect elections to be held and we can expect the Vietnamese to continue to put down foundations of self-government. 
To give them time to build is one reason that we are all there. For there are times when the strong must provide a shield for those on whom the Communists prey. We have provided that shield in other countries. We are providing it there. And this is such a time. 
We are there for another reason, too, and that is because the United States must stand behind its word, even when conditions have added to the cost of honoring a pledge that was given a decade ago. 
I do not have to remind you that our pledge was in fact given by treaty to uphold the security of Southeast Asia. Now that security is in jeopardy because people are trying to use force to take over South Vietnam. When adversity comes is no time to back down on ourcommitment, if we expect our friends around the world to have faith in our word. 
I wish that I could tell you today that the end is in sight. To do so would be folly, for only the Communists would gain from such fiction. This week one of our leading networks and one of our large newspapers in New York reported that the Johnson administration now believes the war will be over by a certain year. 
I wish this were true. I even wish I had the information that that newspaper and that network had. But I do not know one responsible official in Washington who can name the day or the month or the year when the Communists will end the fighting or when they will permit a peaceful settlement. 
I think all of you know how hard I tried in two pauses. I think all of you know how hard the other leaders of our Government, in the executive branch, in the State Department, in the United Nations, in the Senate, tried. 
We went to more than 40 countries with Ambassador Goldberg and Ambassador Harriman as our spokesmen, Secretary Rusk and Mr. Bundy and Secretary Mann, saying to those people that if you will come to a conference table we are ready to sit down and talk instead of fight. Our planes were grounded. Our men were told to sit there and conduct no further raids until they received further orders. 
And for more than 39 days, while we pleaded with 40 countries--every place we went we received favorable response except from the two countries that could do something about it, North Vietnam and Red China. 
So it may be one month, or it may be one year, or it may be several years. No one knows but the men in Hanoi. They hold the passkey to stopping the fighting. They hold the passkey to the room where the peace talks can take place. Only they can decide when the objective that they seek is no longer worth the cost that it carries. 
Until that time comes, until peace comes, our course is clear. We will keep ourcommitments. We will carry on with our determination. We will do what we must do to help protect South Vietnam and to help maintain the stability of Asia. 
We are ready and anxious and willing. And we will continue to do everything that we can do to limit this conflict, for we have no desire to do anything more than is absolutely necessary to protect South Vietnam. 
Our policy is not, will not, and has not been ever to destroy the people of North Vietnam, their country, or their government. Our policy is not to go to war with any other nation. Our policy is to stop the Communists from trying to force their will on the South. It is--as I said before--to provide a shield behind which the free nations of Asia can build the kind of societies that they choose, without interference from any other power. 
Let me say also that the hand of the United States can be as open and as generous in peace as it is clenched and firm in conflict. To those who oppose us, I want to repeat what we have said so often to other nations in the world, to our leaders here at home: that we seek neither territory nor bases, we seek neither economic domination nor military alliance in Vietnam. We seek for the people of Vietnam, North and South, only what they want for themselves. 
It must be clear, especially to those in the South who worked with the Communists to seize control by force, that their choice no longer includes a military takeover. They must know now that North Vietnam cannot really succeed in this takeover and in their desire to have conquest of South Vietnam. So let all of those who are tired of war and death and suffering know that they have nothing whatever to gain by continuing their support of the Communist cause in South Vietnam. 
Wherever they may live, whatever they may say, wherever they may work, let them know that we are tired of war, that we are tired of death and suffering, and that they have absolutely nothing to gain by continuing to give support or aid or comfort to those bent on conquest. 
Our task in this country, in the meantime, is to try to unite our people, to ask them to carry on until the Communists grow weary and until they are willing to turn from the use of force. When that day comes, our men can then come home and the people of Vietnam can go on with the work of building their country themselves. 
Until that day comes, America is going to persist. We must persist. Persist we will



411 - Remarks at the National Reactor Testing Station, Arco, Idaho.
August 26, 1966

In Southeast Asia the United States is today fighting to keep the North Vietnamese from taking over South Vietnam by force. 
That conflict does not have to stop us from finding new ways of dealing with one ann other. Our objective in South Vietnam is local and it is limited: We are there trying to protect the independence of South Vietnam, to provide her people with a chance to decide for themselves where they are going and what they will become




417 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
August 27, 1966

I think it is very important for the Communist Chinese, the Russians, the North Vietnamese to know this--as I tried to say in my press conference the other day. 
We now have exhaustive studies going on as to how we can take these instruments that we have used to deter aggression in South Vietnam for peaceful purposes. That is what we are using that reactor out there for--the one we went to yesterday
THE PRESIDENT. I have always felt it essential for all of them to understand it. I feel the same way about the Chinese on the mainland and the North Vietnamese. The purpose of the Baltimore speech 16 was so they could really understand what was in our heart.

think it is going to take a lot of explaining for the Russians to see what is truly in our hearts, because it is so different from what they really believe. The same thing is true of China and North Vietnam

I have no desire to make any commitment by implication, or otherwise, without the approval of Congress--as I showed you before I sent the planes and Marines into North Vietnam. I got that resolution from the Congress on resisting aggression



420 - Remarks to the Delegates to the American Legion National Convention.
August 30, 1966

Cooperation among the Asians can become the means for liberating hundreds of millions of people--not the least, the people of North and South Vietnam



474 - The President's News Conference
September 21, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. We are very anxious to pursue any proposal that would interest the North Vietnamese. We have no indication that they are interested in sitting down and talking. But we welcome any opportunity to do that as we have all along. 
THE PRESIDENT. I am very happy to see the Pope take the interest that he has. I want to do anything I can to encourage that interest and to support him in any moves that he may make. 
So far as the United States is concerned, and our allies are concerned, we are very anxious to participate in any negotiations that the aggressors are willing to participate in. 
And I think that is the general feeling of all the nations of the world with the possible exception of two. We will do anything we can to encourage the Pope, to cooperate with him, to support negotiations




501 - The President's News Conference
October 6, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. Without passing on the accuracy of your quotation of President Eisenhower, I would say it is the policy of this Government to exercise the best judgment of which we are capable in an attempt to provide the maximum deterrence with a minimum involvement. The easiest thing we could do is get in a larger war with other nations. 
We are constantly concerned with the dangers of that. At the same time, we have no desire to capitulate or to retreat. So it has been the policy of your present administration to provide the strength that General Westmoreland felt was necessary: to prevent the aggressor from succeeding without attempting to either conquer or to invade or to destroy North Vietnam. 
Our purpose is a limited one and that is to permit self-determination for the people of South Vietnam. We are going to be concerned with any effort that might take on more far-reaching objectives or implications



515 - Remarks in Rodney Square, Wilmington, Delaware.
October 13, 1966

We believe we should honor ourcommitments. We believe that we should show the Communists in North Vietnam that they cannot, by aggression, take over their neighbors. 
We believe that we should go the last mile to search for the first faint sign to end hostilities. 
If anyone asks you the question: "Why don't we go from the battlefield to the conference table?" you can look them straight in the face and say, "I will have our President and our Secretary of State at any conference table any day you can get Mr. Ho Chi Minh and the Communists in Hanoi to go there." 
We have said and said and said, in every capital in the world, that we are ready to go from the battlefield to the conference table. But it doesn't do us any good to go into an empty room and talk to ourselves



516 - The President's News Conference in Washington on His Return From the Columbus Day Trip
October 13, 1966

Much has happened in those 6 months. I will not try to take your time to relate it all today, but I think it is significant to point out that the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong monsoon offensive, that gave us concern, failed



540 - Remarks at the Parliamentary Luncheon, Wellington, New Zealand.
October 20, 1966

I was somewhat startled that they should spend their talents and their time and their pickets and their cardboard on the President of the United States, because he has gone to more than 100 capitals with a very simple, plain statement that any picket can understand, that said, "We will meet you any place you designate in 24 hours with whomsoever you choose, to remove this disturbance from the battlefield to the conference room." 
I saw many appeals made to the man to whom no appeal is necessary. But I didn't see Mr. Ho Chi Minh's name on one placard and I wondered why. 
So if those men who join me genuinely and earnestly in wanting to stop the killing and stop the bloodshed and to bring peace to all humanity--if they can deliver the adversary, I will volunteer to present myself without due notice. 
As the struggle continues, we are working with our allies every day, every week, to build the foundations, to bring an end to this vicious war.
Our goal is not to destroy North Vietnam. Our objective is not the objective of Roosevelt and Churchill and the other leaders: unconditional surrender. 
Our goal is not to compel North Vietnam to surrender anything which is hers, not even to bring her Government down or to change her system. Our goal is simply to halt the shooting, to stop the war that she is waging and supporting against her little neighbor. When we succeed--and we shall succeed--I pledge you that we shall begin a nobler war against man's ancient enemies of hunger and ignorance and disease everywhere in Southeast Asia, including North Vietnam, if its Government so desires. 
We say today to the leaders of North Vietnam: A new Asia is emerging. Your people should be part of it, proud, independent, peaceful, the beneficiaries of a social and scientific revolution that is regenerating the life of man. 
What can be gained by continuing a war, we say to North Vietnam, that you cannot win? What can be gained? What can be lost by joining with your brothers in Southeast Asia in a different kind of war, a war for human dignity, a war for health, a war for enlightenment of the mind, a war for your children and generations of children to come? 
Well, America pledges today, from this historic platform, that she will serve in that war against these ancient enemies in Southeast Asia--for its duration
This, we believe, is an inescapable responsibility of a Pacific neighbor, as we know ourselves to be, as you in New Zealand have already shown on many fronts that you are




547 - Remarks at Townsville Upon Departing From Australia.
October 23, 1966

This is especially so where what is at stake is liberty and is freedom itself. We are in Vietnam now precisely because the great majority of our people believe in free choice for the people of the little country of Vietnam. We believe in that right of free choice; in self-determination. We believe in it so strongly that we are willing to go there and fight for it and die for it until that right is achieved and until that right is preserved and protected. 
Most of our people have learned the lesson of this century that nations must not turn their backs on those whose freedom is imperiled by aggression. When they have done so--and the melancholy history of our times tells us that they have--it was not long before their own freedom faced the same mortal danger. 
Thus, at home, we defend theright of the minority to dissent--and theright of the majority to insist that it be heard as well. In Vietnam, we defend theright of the minority to be heard--peacefully, at the ballot box. We defend theright of the majority to be free of persuasion by terror. 
Now I leave this great people, this wonderful land, to go to Manila with your Prime Minister and other heads of state. We will meet with others who have committed their sons to the struggle to the end in Vietnam. We will, of course, review that progress. We will, of course, review the prospects for bringing it to an end. We will, of course, consider what may be done to heal the wounds of a long and a tragic war. 
We know, of course, that there is so much good to be done with the resources that are now being wasted that we want very much to get ahead and transfer this conflict from the battlefield to the conference room. 
I am conscious of the human tragedy and the lost opportunities every day--as the battle reports come to me every morning before I get out of bed. 
Again and again and again I have said: we are ready to stop the bombing of North Vietnam; we are ready to produce a schedule for the withdrawal of our troops-whenever the other side tells us what it is prepared to do to move toward peace in Vietnam and to reciprocate the actions and the decisions that we take. 
We must remember this: It takes only one side to make a war and to begin a war. It takes two sides to end a war--short of unconditional surrender. And we do not seek the unconditional surrender of those who oppose us in Vietnam, nor to destroy or change any system of government, nor to deprive any people of what is rightfully theirs. When a decision is made by the other side to seek its goals through peaceful means--not through terror, not through violence-we shall be the first to meet at the conference table. 
We prefer reason to force. But until that time comes, we shall not let our men go unprotected and undefended. We shall fight for freedom in Vietnam--knowing that as we do, we fight not just for freedom and liberty in Vietnam, but we fight for freedom and liberty in Australia, in New Zealand, in Hawaii, in the United States of America, and freedom and liberty wherever men cherish it




553 - Remarks Recorded for Broadcast to the American People Following the Manila Conference.
October 27, 1966

We saw that the South Vietnamese will try to include in their national life various views and various groups. The Government will offer them amnesty if they will lay down their weapons. It will allow them to move to the North, if they desire it; or to give their skills and energies to building the South. 
So we committed ourselves once again to the Geneva Convention. We urged that the seriously sick and wounded prisoners of war be returned to their homes. We offered to discuss the immediate exchange of prisoners. 
Most urgently, we asked ourselves--what are the real chances for peace? 
The people of Vietnam--many of whom have known a lifetime of strife and terror, of hunger and injustice--long for an end to the fighting that does not require their submission to terror. 
Each of the nations meeting at Manila has now expressed its willingness to seek an honorable peace. None of our nations has insisted on the unconditional surrender of the forces opposing us, or on terms which those forces could reasonably find dishonorable. 
We agreed at Manila that our own forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam as the forces sent down from the North are also withdrawn and as violence disappears. And we made it clear that this could be accomplished from our side in not more than 6 months after the conditions we set out were met--and perhaps even sooner. 
This was, I think, a very important step forward. Our intentions are in writing now for all the world to see. Those who have doubted them can continue to doubt only to hide their unwillingness to seek peace. For we mean what we say: When the aggression from the North has ceased, we do not want and we do not intend to remain in South Vietnam. 
Her people want to get on with the job of building a new South Vietnam, free from the interference of any foreign nation. And that, too, is our goal. 
Until then we must continue to resist the aggression that threatens South Vietnam. We do so not only because that aggression must fail. We do so because we believe that the Communists will unbolt the door to peace only when they are convinced their military campaign cannot succeed. 
We want to end this war today--we want to end it this hour. But as it was said at the Conference in Manila, we have followed every hint, we have made every gesture; now, with the specific spelling out of our position on withdrawal of forces, the ball is in the other court. 
In Vietnam yesterday I thought of the great potential for peace at Cam Ranh Bay. It is a magnificent harbor that we are helping to build there. How wonderful it will be when ships docking there carry the commerce of peace--instead of the implements of war. 
Yet so long as men try to take by violence what is not theirs by right, they must be resisted--and Cam Ranh Bay must continue to supply the men I saw today with the weapons they need to resist it. 
I thank God for the courage of these men. I thank God for the unity of the free nations which are standing up to terror. And I pray to God that our adversary may soon decide that he cannot succeed in what he is attempting and that he will then renounce the use of force in Vietnam. Then--and only then--we can get on full-time with the job that we are so anxious to do




568 - Remarks at a Civic Meeting in Anchorage, Alaska.
November 2, 1966

When I left, Washington, I said that I expected no miracles to emerge from the Manila Conference. Each of the nations invited to Manila had long since committed itself to seeking an early and an honorable end to the war. None of them had demanded the unconditional surrender of the North--as President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill did in World War II. None of them had laid down any impossible conditions for a peaceful settlement. We had repeated again and again and again that we would be glad to go any place, talk to anyone, any time, without any preconditions. Yet all we have ever heard from the other side is that they renew their voice of hostility. 
Until that voice changes--until the Communists realize that they are not going to win this war and they cannot win this war-we think there will be no miracle in Vietnam




577 - The President's News Conference
November 4, 1966

Perhaps the North Vietnamese would like to see it stopped but our communication is bad and at least up to this time we have been unable to convince them that the way to stop it is to come to the conference room. 
Now we don't know why. We wish we did know why. We would go more than halfway if we just knew which way to go. 
Mr. Harriman is going one way now. Mr. Bundy is going another way now. Mr. Black is going another way. Mr. Rusk will be going to the NATO meeting. I asked him to go back through Asia on his way there, the other way around. 
But until we can reason this thing out, we must maintain the strength to defend our men and to defend territorial integrity of the boundaries of our allies. We intend to do that
THE PRESIDENT. I would not want to speculate. I don't know what proposals His Holiness might make. Whatever proposals he made would be very seriously considered, evaluated. I can't conceive of anyone feeling that one side ought to stop bombing and the other side ought to continue it. 
I would hope that all this talk about stopping the bombing would have some reference to the bombing that they did on Independence Day when General Westmoreland, day before yesterday, intended to go out to a ceremony they were having and they tried to bomb the place where he was supposed to sit. 
I would hope that some of this "stopping the bombing" agitation would be directed to the folks that throw the bombs at our Embassy in Saigon. We have never bombed the North Vietnamese Embassy. We have never bombed their population. 
Sure, we try to hit a military target, a petroleum target, or an electric plant. But here they come in and try to bomb the seats where our Ambassador will sit, where the head of state will sit, where our general, commanding our forces, will be. 
If they want us to stop bombing, we ought to see what they are willing to stop. We will be glad to carefully consider anyone's proposals that represent two-way streets. 
We don't want to talk about just half of it, though.
You can read the communiqu?. I think it is very clear that the seven participants in that conference felt that they wanted the entire world to know that if infiltration would cease, if the aggression would cease, if the violence would cease from the standpoint of our adversary, the allies would gladly reciprocate by withdrawing their troops, and that they would withdraw them in a period of not to exceed 6 months. 
Most of the nations, if not some of our own citizens, most of the countries, know that we do not plan to occupy Vietnam or dominate it, or try to determine its official life once the aggression and the infiltration and the violence there ceases. 
But some of them can't understand, because I guess they wouldn't make huge investments and walk off and leave them, how we could do that. 
We have explained that we would pull out just as soon as the infiltration, the aggression, and the violence ceases. We made that statement and we set a time limit on it. 
Why would we want to stay there if there was no aggression, if there was no infiltration and the violence ceased? We wouldn't want to stay there as tourists. We wouldn't want to keep 400,000 men there just to march up and down the runways at Cam Ranh Bay. 
But we felt if we stated it again and each of us subscribed to it, including the Government of South Vietnam, that they would ask us and ask all the other allies to withdraw their forces, if the other side withdrew theirs, the infiltration ceased, the violence ceased, that it would probably clarify our position. 
It shouldn't be confused. Every participant in that conference, acting on good faith, with the best of motives, wanted to say to North Vietnam and every other nation in the world that we intend to stay there only so long as our presence is necessary to protect the territorial integrity of South Vietnam, to see that the violence there ceases, and the infiltration and the aggression ceases. 
Our position is clear. We don't want to occupy that country. We didn't want to occupy the Dominican Republic. We went in there because our people were being shot at, because aggressive forces wanted to establish a form of government that was not in keeping with the will of the majority of the people of that country. 
Once we were able to let the people have a free election, supervised election, let the majority speak its will, we pulled our troops out and came home. 
That is what we will do in South Vietnam. When the aggression, infiltration, and violence ceases, not a nation there wants to keep occupying troops in South Vietnam. 




654 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
December 31, 1966

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I have followed our activity in Vietnam very closely. I think the country knows--and I would like to repeat again--that it is the policy of this Government to bomb only military targets. 
We realize that when you do that, inevitably and almost invariably there are casualties, there are losses of lives. 
We regret to see those losses. We do everything we can to minimize them. But they do occur in North Vietnam as they do in South Vietnam. 
There are thousands of civilians who have died this year in South Vietnam as a result of detonation of grenades and bombs. And every casualty is to be regretted. 
But only military targets have been authorized. And I am informed that our men who are responsible for carrying out our orders have done their very best to execute those orders as given
THE PRESIDENT. None whatever. There has been no change. So far as the evidence that we have at this time there has been no mistake. I can only repeat to you what I have said before, and what has been said by other departments of the Government. Our orders are to bomb only military targets. Those are the only orders we have issued. We believe that our men have carried out those orders to the very best of their ability. 
There will be civilian casualties in connection with the bombing of military targets. There are civilian casualties taking place every day--some this morning--in South Vietnam. I am concerned with casualties in both South Vietnam and North Vietnam. And I wish that all of our people would be equally as concerned. 
I think that the quicker we can have a peace conference, the quicker we can arrange a true cease-fire, the quicker we can stop this total war on both sides, the better off all of our people will be. 
But as long as it goes on, civilians are going to be killed, casualties will occur. And I regret every single casualty in both areas
THE PRESIDENT. We will be very glad to do more than our 'part in meeting Hanoi halfway in any possible cease-fire, or truce, or peace conference negotiations. 
I would be very interested in what their response is and what they would be agreeable to before irrevocably committing this country. 
If you can look at all the decisions they make and their reactions, I think we would better be able to determine our own. 
I have said on a number of occasions that we are ready to talk, any time and anywhere, that the Vietcong will have no difficulty in making their views known to us. 
But all the questions turn on when are we willing to do it, and are we willing to do it. The answer to those questions is a strong "yes." But up to this moment we have heard nothing from the other side. 
You just can't have a one-sided peace conference, or a one-sided cessation of hostilities, or ask our own boys not to defend themselves, or to tie their hands behind them, unless the other side is willing to reciprocate. 
Now, I assure you that we are willing to meet them more than halfway, if there is any indication of movement on their part. 





3 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union.
January 10, 1967

We are in Vietnam because the United States of America and our allies arecommitted by the SEATO Treaty to "act to meet the common danger" of aggression in Southeast Asia. 
We are in Vietnam because an international agreement signed by the United States, North Vietnam, and others in 1962 is being systematically violated by the Communists. That violation threatens the independence of all the small nations in Southeast Asia, and threatens the peace of the entire region and perhaps the world. 
We are there because the people of South Vietnam have as much right to remain non-Communist--if that is what they choose-as North Vietnam has to remain Communist. 
We are there because the Congress has pledged by solemn vote to take all necessary measures to prevent further aggression. 
No better words could describe our present course than those once spoken by the great Thomas Jefferson: 
"It is the melancholy law of human societies to be compelled sometimes to choose a great evil in order to ward off a greater." 
We have chosen to fight a limited war in Vietnam in an attempt to prevent a larger war--a war almost certain to follow, I believe, if the Communists succeed in overrunning and taking over South Vietnam by aggression and by force. I believe, and I am supported by some authority, that if they are not checked now the world can expect to pay a greater price to check them later. 
That is what our statesmen said when they debated this treaty, and that is why it was ratified 82 to 1 by the Senate many years ago. 
You will remember that we stood in Western Europe 20 years ago. Is there anyone in this Chamber tonight who doubts that the course of freedom was not changed for the better because of the courage of that stand? 
Sixteen years ago we and others stopped another kind of aggression--this time it was in Korea. Imagine how different Asia might be today if we had failed to act when the Communist army of North Korea marched south. The Asia of tomorrow will be far different because we have said in Vietnam, as we said 16 years ago in Korea: "This far and no further." 
I think I reveal no secret when I tell you that we are dealing with a stubborn adversary who is committed to the use of force and terror to settle political questions. 
I wish I could report to you that the conflict is almost over. This I cannot do. We face more cost, more loss, and more agony. For the end is not yet. I cannot promise you that it will come this year--or come next year. Our adversary still believes, I think, tonight, that he can go on fighting longer than we can, and longer than we and our allies will be prepared to stand up and resist. 
Our men in that area--there are nearly 500,000 now--have borne well "the burden and the heat of the day." Their efforts have deprived the Communist enemy of the victory that he sought and that he expected a year ago. We have steadily frustrated his main forces. General Westmoreland reports that the enemy can no longer succeed on the battlefield. 
So I must say to you that our pressure must be sustained--and will be sustained-until he realizes that the war he started is costing him more than he can ever gain. 
I know of no strategy more likely to attain that end than the strategy of "accumulating slowly, but inexorably, every kind of material resource"--of "laboriously teaching troops the very elements of their trade." That, and patience--and I mean a great deal of patience. 
Our hope that all of this will someday happen rests on the conviction that we, the American people and our allies, will and are going to see Vietnam through to an honorable peace. 
We will support all appropriate initiatives by the United Nations, and others, which can bring the several parties together for unconditional discussions of peace--anywhere, any time. And we will continue to take every possible initiative ourselves to constantly probe for peace. 
Until such efforts succeed, or until the infiltration ceases, or until the conflict subsides, I think the course of wisdom for this country is that we just must firmly pursue our present course. We will stand firm in Vietnam. 
How long it will take I cannot prophesy. I only know that the will of the American people, I think, is tonight being tested. 




34 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1967

And I do not see that the differences in China are going to contribute anything to the strength of the North Vietnamese. 
THE PRESIDENT. I stated in my Baltimore speech in early 1965 what we expected to come from the bombing. 
We felt that it would improve the morale of the people in South Vietnam who felt that they had almost lost the war. 
We felt that it would make the North Vietnamese pay a much heavier price for what they were doing. 
And we felt that it would make the infiltration more difficult. 
We think it has achieved all of those expressed purposes. 
We cannot speak with cold assurance on the infiltration and the numbers each day, or each week, or each month. 
In some quarters of the year our indications are that they increase. In other periods of the year, the next quarter, they may go down Some. 
I know of nothing that I can conclude as highly significant from the guesses and the estimates that we have made. 
THE PRESIDENT. Just almost any step. 
As far as we can see, they have not taken any yet. 
And we would be glad to explore any reciprocal action that they or any of their spokesmen would care to suggest. 
We have made one proposal after the other. We would like to have a cease-fire. We would be very glad to stop our bombing, as we have on two previous occasions, if we could have any indication of reciprocal action. 
But as of now they have given none. And I assume they are willing to give none until I hear further. 
THE PRESIDENT. I have seen nothing that any of them have said that indicates any seriousness on their part. I am awaiting any offer they might care to make. 
They know that we are in contact with them. I cannot speak for them. But I am very anxious for them to make any proposal. And we will give it very prompt and serious consideration



70 - The President's News Conference
February 27, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, I would say that there is some activity taking place that we would not say has been normal through the past weeks, particularly the truce period. I think you could, if you searched, find some comparable action here and there, some similar actions. 
I wouldn't want to put my credibility in doubt by saying it never had happened before and then have somebody do a little research and find that on occasion something had happened that was at least comparable. 
But I think it is fair to say that this is action over and above what has been taking place over the last few weeks. Certainly it is more far-reaching. 
The step-up may connote something that I wouldn't want to embrace, but I would say it is more far-reaching. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would say we don't need to label it, really. I think what we would want to conclude, really, is that our military and civilian leaders are doing what they believe is best to do to protect the safety, the lives of our men there and to try to bring about a halt to the war and the aggression. 
I don't mean that it necessarily follows that we ought to have a slogan for it. But it does represent the reasoned judgment of our military and civilian men that this is desirable and essential in the context of our situation there, namely, their infiltration and their buildups and so forth.
THE PRESIDENT. He is not on any peace mission. He is visiting some of the areas

THE PRESIDENT. I want to reconstruct your statement a little bit. Rather than put a slogan on it of some kind, I would say that the action itself is more far-reaching than it was the day before or something. That is what I mean. I don't mean to imply that these are in themselves a far-reaching thing. That is clear? 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't want to get that connotation in that context. 
No, I don't think that we can state with any great precision how many individuals are in South Vietnam because we didn't bomb or did bomb during a period. We were very careful about that. Some people will put up a straw man sometimes and say bombing hasn't done what you said it would do. 
Well, if you will go back to what we said it would do when we started there--and what we said in Baltimore in April--generally speaking, we feel that it has done those things that we expected it to do. 
No one has ever expected, except those who want us to stop it, that bombing would stop infiltration. So that is my comment on your question. We never thought it would stop infiltration. 
We do think that there are hundreds of thousands of people who are busy trying to put the bridges back and the railroad ties back, and the other things back. I would estimate we have lost less than 500 men in our bombing experiences. Probably we have lost a billion dollars in planes. We thought that we could make them pay a rather heavy price in manpower. 
They may have a hundred thousand busy on air defense. They may have a hundred thousand or so busy on coastal defense. I don't want to be held to these figures. 
I am just illustrating there are a substantial number of people engaged in these activities. Some have estimated as many as 300,000 additional on roads, rails, and these other things--if they were busy in cleaning up after them, repairing the roads, bridges, and railroad ties. 
So you have a labor force of 500,000 there busy doing these things that the 500 men who lost their lives brought about. 
If they weren't doing that they would be down there with some of your cousins and brothers doing other things or bringing in other things. Their efforts in this direction now would be doing something else. We know that. We do think it has cost them. We do think from their own voices and their sympathizers and their friends in the world that there are good indications that they would like to see the bombing stopped. They would like to see these men unrestrained and let them go on to doing other things that our men over there, our 500,000, would have to defend. 
I don't know how much more ammunition these people would be down there using and fighting if they weren't building bridges. You can't be precise on all of those things. 
I think the proof is in their own statements, how they feel about stopping this activity. Just as I would like all of you to write and talk and speak on the stopping of the bombing of Danang yesterday. I assume there will be a good many speeches today, a good many editorials tomorrow, and a good many columns from the press that will really say that the bombing of Danang yesterday was a very bad thing because it killed a number of Americans, wounded a number of Americans. It destroyed a lot of things on that air base. The hand grenades and mortars they fired did this. 
We know it hurts us. We assume it hurts them. We believe it does




80 - The President's News Conference
March 2, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. We are in Vietnam because of the violation of two solemn international agreements. 
In 1954 Hanoi agreed that North Vietnam should not be used for the resumption of hostilities or to further an aggressive policy. 
In 1962 Hanoi agreed to withdraw all of its military forces from Laos, to refrain from reintroducing such forces, and not to use the territory of Laos to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries. 
If I had the time, I would go in some detail into the recommendations that General Maxwell Taylor made to President Kennedy in his report of November 3, 1961, after Hanoi had violated the Geneva Declaration of 1954, but before the Geneva Declaration of 1962 was finally completed. 
Referring to that report General Taylor said, among other things, that his recommendation that he made at that time was not "the final word." Then he went on to add that it might be necessary to attack the sources of supply at their source if they continued to insist on aggression. 
We have made it abundantly clear that we were willing to have a complete cease-fire at any time they were willing to cease attack and cease aggression. 
They have made it abundantly clear that they are not willing to do that, notwithstanding the "reports" that you refer to from time to time. 
It is very dear [clear] to us that if they are going to bomb Pleiku as they did and kill our men in the middle of the night, if they are going to bomb Danang as they did just a few days ago, if they are going to lob their mortar shells into the backs of our soldiers as they did last night, you must, if you are at all fair to those men who are defending you there, permit them to respond. 
They will respond, they are responding, and they will continue to respond, I believe, successfully. 
I think that the American people should know that this is a question between their President, their country, their troops, and Mr. Ho Chi Minh and the troops that he is sending in from the North. Everyone can take whatever side of the matter that he wants to. 
As far as this Government is concerned, we have, from the very beginning, tried to keep our hand out and our guard up. We have tried to extend the hand of peace and say that we are willing to cease fire, for unconditional discussions, for 4 points, or 14 points, or any points, but if they were unwilling to do that and they insisted on carrying on their offensive, our men had to be in a position to respond?




116 - Address on U.S. Policy in Vietnam Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Tennessee State Legislature.
March 15, 1967

It was 2 years ago that we were forced to choose, forced to make a decision between major commitments in defense of South Vietnam or retreat--the evacuation of more than 25,000 of our troops, the collapse of the Republic of Vietnam in the face of subversion and external assault. 
Andrew Jackson would never have been surprised at the choice we made. 
We chose a course in keeping with American tradition, in keeping with the foreign policy of at least three administrations, with the expressed will of the Congress of the United States, with our solemn obligations under the Southeast Asian Treaty, and with the interest of 16 million South Vietnamese who had no wish to live under Communist domination. 
As ourcommitment in Vietnam required more men and more equipment, some voices were raised in opposition. The administration was urged to disengage, to find an excuse to abandon the effort. 
These cries came despite growing evidence that the defense of Vietnam held the key to the political and economic future of free Asia. The stakes of the struggle grew corresponding!y. 
It became clear that if we were prepared to staythecourse in Vietnam, we could help to lay the cornerstone for a diverse and independent Asia, full of promise and resolute in the cause of peaceful economic development for her long-suffering peoples. 
But if we faltered, the forces of chaos would scent victory and decades of strife and aggression would stretch endlessly before us. 
The choice was clear. We would staythecourse. And we shall staythecourse. 
I think most Americans support this fundamental decision. Most of us remember the fearful cost of ignoring aggression. Most of us have cast aside the illusion that we can live in an affluent fortress while the world slides into chaos. 
I think we have all reached broad agreement on our basic objectives in Vietnam. 
First, an honorable peace, that will leave the people of South Vietnam free to fashion their own political and economic institutions without fear of terror or intimidation from the North. 
Second, a Southeast Asia in which all countries--including a peaceful North Vietnam-apply their scarce resources to the real problems of their people: combating hunger, ignorance, and disease. 
I have said many, many times, that nothing would give us greater pleasure than to invest our own resources in the constructive works of peace rather than in the futile destruction of war. 
Third, a concrete demonstration that aggression across international frontiers or demarcation lines is no longer an acceptable means of 'political change. 
There is also, ! think, a general agreement among Americans on the things that we do not want in Vietnam. 
We do not want permanent bases. We will begin with the withdrawal of our troops on a reasonable schedule whenever reciprocal concessions are forthcoming from our adversary. 
We do not seek to impose our political beliefs upon South Vietnam. Our Republic rests upon a brisk commerce in ideas. We will be happy to see free competition in the intellectual marketplace whenever North Vietnam is willing to shift the conflict from the battlefield to the ballot box. 
So, these are the broad principles on which most Americans agree. 
On a less general level, however, the events and frustrations of these past few difficult weeks have inspired a number of questions about our Vietnam policy in the minds and hearts of a good many of our citizens. Today, here in this historic chamber, I want to deal with some of those questions that figure most prominently in. the press and in some of the letters which reach a President's desk. 
Precisely what, they ask, is our military situation, and what are the prospects of victory? 
The first answer is that Vietnam is aggression in a new guise, as far removed from trench warfare as the rifle from the longbow. This is a war of infiltration, of subversion, of ambush. Pitched battles are very rare, and even more rarely are they decisive. 
Today, more than 1 million men from the Republic of Vietnam and its six allies are engaged in the order of battle. 
Despite continuing increases in North Vietnam infiltration, this strengthening of allied forces in 1966, under the brilliant leadership of General Westmoreland, was instrumental in reversing the whole course of this war. 
--We estimate that 55,000 North Vietnamese and Vietcong were killed in 1966, compared with 35,000 the previous year. Many more were wounded, and more than 20,000 defected. 
--By contrast, 9,500 South Vietnamese, more than 5,000 Americans, and 600 from other allied forces were killed in action. 
--The Vietnamese Army achieved a 1966 average of two weapons captured from the Vietcong to every one lost, a dramatic turn around from the previous 2 years. 
--Allied forces have made several successful sweeps through territories that were formerly considered Vietcong sanctuaries only a short time ago. These operations not only cost the enemy large numbers of men and weapons, but are very damaging to his morale. 
Well, what does all of this mean? Will the North Vietnamese change their tactics? Will there be less infiltration of main units? Will there be more of guerrilla warfare? 
The actual truth is we just don't know. What we do know is that General Westmoreland's strategy is producing results, that our military situation has substantially improved, that our military success has permitted the groundwork to be laid for a pacification program which is the long-run key to an independent South Vietnam. 
Since February 1965, our military operations have included selective bombing of military targets in North Vietnam. Our purposes are three: 
--To back our fighting men by denying the enemy a sanctuary; 
--To exact a penalty against North Vietnam for her flagrant violations of the Geneva accords of 1954 and 1962; 
--To limit the flow, or to substantially increase the cost of infiltration of men and material from North Vietnam. 
All of our intelligence confirms that we have been successful. 
Yet, some of our people object strongly to this aspect of our policy. Must we bomb, many people ask. Does it do any military good? Is it consistent with America's limited objectives? Is it an inhuman act that is aimed at civilians? 
On the question of military utility, I can only report the firm belief of the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Central Intelligence Agency, General Westmoreland and our commanders in the field, and all the courses of information and advice available to the Commander in Chief and that is that the bombing is causing serious disruption and is bringing about added burdens to the North Vietnamese infiltration effort. 
We know, for example, that half a million people are kept busy just repairing damage to bridges, roads, railroads, and other strategic facilities, and in air and coastal defense and repair of powerplants. 
I also want to say categorically that it is not the position of the American Government that the bombing will be decisive in getting Hanoi to abandon aggression. It has, however, created very serious problems for them. The best indication of how substantial is the fact that they are working so hard every day with all their friends throughout the world to try to get us to stop. 
The bombing is entirely consistent with America's limited objectives in South Vietnam. The strength of Communist main force units in the South is clearly based on their infiltration from the North. So I think it is simply unfair to our American soldiers, sailors, and marines, and our Vietnamese allies to ask them to face increased enemy personnel and firepower without making an effort to try to reduce that infiltration. 
Now as to bombing civilians, I would simply say that we are making an effort that is unprecedented in the history of warfare to be sure that we do not. It is our policy to bomb military targets only. 
We have never deliberately bombed cities, nor attacked any target with the purpose of inflicting civilian casualties. 
We hasten to add, however, that we recognize, and we regret, that some people, even after warning, are living and working in the vicinity of military targets and they have suffered. 
We are also too aware that men and machines are not infallible and that some mistakes do occur. 
But our record on this account is, in my opinion, highly defensible. 
Look for a moment at the record of the other side. 
Any civilian casualties that result from our operations are inadvertent, in stark contrast to the calculated Vietcong policy of systematic terror. 
Tens of thousands of innocent Vietnamese civilians have been killed, tortured, and kidnaped by the Vietcong. There is no doubt about the deliberate nature of the Vietcong program. One need only note the frequency with which Vietcong victims are village leaders, teachers, health workers, and others who are trying to carry out constructive programs for their people. 
Yet, the deeds of the Vietcong go largely unnoted in the public debate. It is this moral double bookkeeping which makes us get sometimes very weary of our critics. 
But there is another question that we should answer: Why don't we stop bombing
to make it easier to begin negotiations? The answer is a simple one: 
--We stopped for 5 days and 20 hours in May 1965. Representatives of Hanoi simply returned our message in a plain envelope. 
--We stopped bombing for 36 days and 15 hot:rs in December 1965 and January 1966. Hanoi only replied: "A political settlement of the Vietnam problem can be envisaged only when the United States Government has accepted the four-point stand of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, has proved this by actual deeds, has stopped unconditionally and for good its air raids and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam." 
--And only last month we stopped bombing for 5 days and 18 hours, after many prior weeks in which we had communicated to them several possible routes to peace, any one of which America was prepared to take. Their response, as you know, delivered to His Holiness the Pope, was this: The United States "must put an end to their aggression in Vietnam, end unconditionally and definitively the bombing and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, withdraw from South Vietnam all American and satellite troops, recognize the South Vietnamese National Front for Liberation, and let the Vietnamese people settle themselves their own affairs." That is where we stand today. 
They have three times rejected a bombing pause as a means to open the way to ending the war and going to the negotiating table. 
The tragedy of South Vietnam is not limited to casualty lists. 
There is much tragedy in the story of a nation at war for nearly a generation. It is the story of economic stagnation. It is the story of a generation of young men--the flower of the labor force--pressed into military service by one side or the other. 
We have just lived through another flurry of rumors of "peace feelers." 
Our years of dealing with this problem have taught us that peace will not come easily. 
The problem is a very simple one: It takes two to negotiate at a peace table and Hanoi has just simply refused to consider coming to a peace table. 
I don't believe that our own position on peace negotiations can be stated any more clearly than I have stated it many times in the past--or than the distinguished Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk, or Ambassador Goldberg, or any number of other officials have stated it in every forum that we could find. 
I do want to repeat to you this afternoon--and through you to the 'people of America--the essentials now, lest there be any doubts. 
--United States representatives are ready at any time for discussions of the Vietnam problem or any related matter, with any government or governments, if there is any reason to believe that these discussions will in any way seriously advance the cause of peace. 
--We are prepared to go more than halfway and to use any avenue possible to encourage such discussions. And we have done that at every opportunity. 
We believe that the Geneva accords of 1954 and 1962 could serve as the central elements of a peaceful settlement. These accords provide, in essence, that both South and North Vietnam should be free from external interference, while at the same time they would be free independently to determine their positions on the question of reunification. 
We also stand ready to advance toward a reduction of hostilities, without prior agreement. The road to peace could go from deeds to discussions, or it could start with discussions and go to deeds. 
We are ready to take either route. We are ready to move on both of them. 
But reciprocity must be the fundamental principle of any reduction in hostilities. The United States cannot and will not reduce its activities unless and until there is some reduction on the other side. To follow any other rule would be to violate the trust that we undertake when we ask a man to risk his life for his country. 
We will negotiate a reduction of the bombing whenever the Government of North Vietnam is ready and there are almost innumerable avenues of communication by which the Government of North Vietnam can make their readiness known. 
To this date and this hour, there has been no sign of that readiness. 
Yet, we must--and we will--keep on trying. 
As I speak to you today, Secretary Rusk and our representatives throughout the world are on a constant alert. Hundreds and hundreds of quiet diplomatic conversations, free from the glare of front-page headlines, or of klieg lights, are being held and they will be held on the possibilities of bringing peace to Vietnam. 
Governor Averell Harriman, with 25 years of experience of troubleshooting on the most difficult international problems that America has ever had, is carrying out my instructions that every possible lead, however slight it may first appear, from any source, public or private, shall be followed up. 
Let me conclude by saying this: I so much wish that it were within my power to assure that all those in Hanoi could hear one simple message--America is committed to the defense of South Vietnam until an honorable peace can be negotiated. 
If this one communication gets through and its rational implications are drawn, we should be at the table tomorrow. It would be none too soon for us. Then hundreds of thousands of Americans--as brave as any who ever took the field for their country-could come back home. 
And the man who could lead them back is the man that you trained and sent from here, our own beloved, brilliant General "Westy" Westmoreland. As these heroes came back to their homes, millions of Vietnamese could begin to make a decent life for themselves and their families without fear of terrorism, without fear of war, or without fear of Communist enslavement. 
That is what we are working and what we are fighting for. We must not--we shall not--and we will not--fail



128 - Remarks at the Opening Session of the Guam Conference.
March 20, 1967

There are many signs that we are at a favorable turning point. Your fighting men, aided by your allies, now hold the initiative and are striking heavy blows against the strongholds and refuges of the Vietcong and their North Vietnamese masters. And in the villages the medicine of the revolutionary development program is already beginning to take effect. The Vietcong are turning sharply against that program's administration. I think that is very solid tribute to its effectiveness



134 - Remarks at the Airport Upon Departing From Guam.
March 21, 1967

We wanted these distinguished Americans to meet the leaders of Vietnam with whom they will be working in the months ahead. 
We came here to discuss seven of our major concerns in Vietnam today: 
First, the military progress of the war, both in the South and in the North; 
Second, the political progress that is being made in South Vietnam




135 - Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base Near Washington Upon Returning From the Guam Conference.
March 21, 1967

As I said upon my departure from Guam, we discussed seven of our major concerns at our meeting there. 
First, the military progress of the war, both in the South and in the North




150 - Remarks at a Dinner for the Democratic State Chairmen.
March 30, 1967

In the months to come, every American must realize why we have taken on the obligations of freedom in Vietnam--not only for ourselves, our children, and our grandchildren, but for hundreds of millions throughout the world who prefer the possibility of democracy to the certainty of totalitarianism. 
Thus our obligations in Vietnam are obligations to the future: to generations yet unborn, as well as to those who must suffer the agonies of the present conflict. 
I have not viewed the war as a political matter. I never will. 
I believe that there is a basic understanding in America today regarding Vietnam that is shared by Republicans as well as Democrats--hawks as well as doves-- Easterners as well as Westerners. 
But if the conduct of this struggle is brought into our public discussions in 1968, let us be ready for that. Let us ask any of those who challenge us how they would pursue this engagement with terror: by gambling with a total worldwide war, or by running from their responsibilities or by permitting our adversaries to descend, unimpeded on the men who fight for us in the hills and jungles and rice paddies--or instead, by pursuing a policy that will stop the aggressor in the South, increase his costs in the North, and bring him ultimately to the bargaining table




166 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor Posthumously to Specialist 4 Daniel Fernandez, USA.
April 6, 1967

Daniel Fernandez died on February 18, 1966. He died less than 3 weeks after we, in our ceaseless search for peace, had made our longest pause in the bombing of the North. 
The question that haunts me as we meet here today should really concern every American. It is this: Was that grenade on one of the trucks, or on one of the trains, or on one of the sampans that we let pass unmolested during that long 37-day pause? 
If it was, then Daniel Fernandez died as more than a hero of battle. He died a martyr in our search for 'peace. 
And those who today are urging an unconditional permanent cessation of bombing should ask themselves: "What are the consequences?" It is one thing to talk abstractly of peace and war. It is something quite different to think of a young man named Daniel Fernandez who will dream no more




195 - Remarks at a Luncheon for General Westmoreland.
April 28, 1967

The enemy is always a great digger. He bores into the ground like moles. He establishes very carefully--using women primarily for labor--underground shelters, tunnels, so as to provide protection against our bombing raids for his ammunition and his supplies. The enemy, at the present time, has approximately eight divisions in the country. Six of these are from North Vietnam. 
North Vietnam has taken over, during the last year, more and more of the war burden. They have sent down North Vietnamese leadership because they do not trust the South Vietnamese who followed the ways of the Vietcong. 
There is friction between the North Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese. When we apply military pressure and couple that with an imaginative psy-war program, we find defections in abundance
Now the enemy considers Saigon as his ultimate objective. After all, this is the political and economic capital of the country. However, to get to Saigon he has established a number of intermediate objectives, the primary one of which is in the highlands. This is known as the "High Plateau." This is strategic, because it provides a stepping stone to the productive areas along the coastline. Its seizure would permit cutting the country in two. This has been the enemy's classic strategy, a strategy that has been studied by the Commanding General Staff College in Hanoi over a period of years. 
Next, the enemy would like to control the productive areas along the coast where the people live and where there is plenty to eat. He wants to control these for many reasons, but one is to provide food for his main force units that are in the jungles and in the mountains. 
Now, finally, the enemy, particularly in recent months, has concentrated considerable force that has moved from North Vietnam in and around the demilitarized zone and into that portion of Laos just west of the northern part of the country. We have countered this action by assuming the following strategic posture: 
Next, I have concentrated a division minus a brigade, two-thirds of a division, in the highlands area in order to block any invasion of the highlands, because of the presence of approximately seven regiments along the Cambodian border, all North Vietnamese
As you well know, the Third Marine Amphibious Force is concentrated in the five northern provinces. Recently I have constituted out of bits and pieces, a professional division which is now known as Task Force Oregon that has moved to Quang Ngai Province in order to relieve Marines so they could move farther north to confront this buildup of North Vietnamese troops. 
Now, the guerrillas and the main force units work hand in glove. They are a team. The guerrilla can accomplish very little without the main force, if victory is the objective. 
On the other hand, the main forces need the guerrillas as eyes and ears, as guides, as scouts, as intelligence agents, as procurers of food. And this speculation that you frequently see in the press--that the enemy is going to abandon his main forces--is contrary to the Communist doctrine and I don't believe will ever take place. He may withdraw temporarily, but only in order to reequip himself and to retrain because the main forces, the conventional forces, using the guerrillas as guides and intelligence agents, are the force of decision. 
How does the enemy supply himself? Some by sea, but became of the excellent job done by our U.S. Navy coastal surveillance force we believe he is getting very little in by sea, although he is getting some. We have sunk a number of steel-hulled trawlers loaded with arms and ammunition. His main supply route is down through the so-called Laos Panhandle, southern Laos, and this is demonstrated gravely by the red arrows. This is a well-developed Communist team. 
Although his means are somewhat primitive his organization is sophisticated. During the dry weather period he can move trucks down through the area and he sends his engineers in advance in order to prepare these routes. This is now going on, because the weather is currently good in the panhandle area. 
A year ago, the mastermind of the Hanoi directed war put forth seven 'points which I consider a very intelligent assessment of our problems. I refer to General Giap, the hero of Dien Bien Phu and the number one military man in the Communist hierarchy in Hanoi. Giap made the forecast that the U.S. would not be able to put sufficient troops into South Vietnam to achieve our objectives. 
Of course, he has been proven wrong in this regard and this also implies a skepticism that we could provide the logistic apparatus and the logistic bases to support our troops and definitely he has been proven wrong in that regard
The next story concerns a young man, 35 years old, in Hanoi. He was inducted into the service. He was too old to fight because a man 35 in Vietnam is an elderly man. He is beyond middle age. So he was made into a porter. He had a weak mind and a strong back. 
He marched for 2 days south of Hanoi. He moved into an ammunition depot in the jungle, one we had not picked up and therefore had not bombed. They strapped two 82 millimeter mortar rounds to his back. 
For the next 6 weeks he walked to the southern part of Vietnam through Laos and finally down to Zone C which is just north of Saigon, a very thick jungle area. There hidden in the jungle was a large ammunition depot. 
So after walking for many, many weeks he told the checker who was cataloging the ammunition, "I have just arrived from North Vietnam with two rounds of 82 millimeter mortar." The checker didn't even look up. He said, "Lay them over there and go back and pick up two more." 
This demonstrates the extremes that these people will go to using primitive transportation methods, porters, bicycles, and trucks when they can. When trucks cannot be used they will use other means


204 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. There is a Communist position which you can judge from the Communist propaganda which comes out of Peking, North Vietnam, and the Soviet Union every day. One can judge their position on this general Vietnam question. We keep in close touch with it at all times. I don't know any purpose which would be served by my going beyond that

THE PRESIDENT. I am not privy to their thoughts. I don't know what may motivate them. 
THE PRESIDENT. We will diligently pursue each day any route that we could think would lead to a peaceful settlement. We do not see any hopeful prospects at the moment. We are pursuing this week, as we have every week, every road that could lead in that peaceful direction



225 - The President's News Conference
May 18, 1967

The other expression I have seen is the 16 in the letter saying, "Don't be misled, North Vietnam." 



272 - Address at the State Department's Foreign Policy Conference for Educators.
June 19, 1967

I regret that this morning I cannot report any major progress toward peace in Vietnam. 
I can promise you that we have tried every possible way to bring about either discussions between the opposing sides, or a practical deescalation of the violence itself. 
Thus far there has been no serious response from the other side. 
We are ready--and we have long been ready--to engage in a mutual deescalation of the fighting. But we cannot stop only half the war, nor can we abandon ourcommitment to the people of South Vietnam as long as the enemy attacks and fights on. And so long as North Vietnam attempts to seize South Vietnam by force, we must, and we will, block its efforts--so that the people of South Vietnam can determine their own future in peace. 
We would very much like to see the day come--and come soon--when we can cooperate with all the nations of the region, including North Vietnam, in healing the wounds of a war that has continued, we think, for far too long. When the aggression ends, then that day will follow.



308 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Distinguished Service Medal to Adm. David L. McDonald.
July 13, 1967

The country had been divided along the 17th parallel, into North and South. It was the last time that the people of North Vietnam had a free choice between communism and democracy. 
Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese elected freedom. They voted for liberty with their feet. With the few possessions they could carry, they gathered in the now famous harbor of Haiphong. From there the American Navy gave them their historic passage to freedom, carrying them, their families, and their meager goods south, away from Communist rule.



312 - The President's News Conference
July 18, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. No. I am not familiar with the reports there. I have more reports in American newspapers than I can keep up with. 
I think we have always made it clear from the first day that we were ready to negotiate when there was anyone with whom we could negotiate--outside of this country. We have a lot of people in this country to negotiate with. 
Mr. Ho Chi Minh made clear his views in his letter.10 We have made our position clear from time to time--that we were ready and anxious to go to the conference table and meet the other side halfway at any time, but we have no indication at this time that they are willing to do that
THE PRESIDENT. The United States position is that we are ready to meet with them at any time to discuss arrangements for bringing the war to an end on an equitable and just basis. We have never been able to get them or any of their friends to bring them to a conference table. 
Until we can, we are not able to explore with them what they might be willing to do. We hear from travelers and from self-appointed spokesmen from time to time this and that. On occasions we have attempted to confirm it, and we have negotiated directly with them. 
I think the last position stated by Mr. Ho Chi Minh is a safe statement of their viewpoint. I refer you--as I did Mr. Deakin-to their position as enumerated in that letter. Our position is that we would be glad to meet tomorrow, next week, or any time to discuss conditionally or unconditionally, on any basis, to see what they would be willing to do



352 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Vietnam Civilian Service Awards
August 16, 1967

Given that background, we ought not to be astonished that this struggle in Vietnam continues. We ought not to be astonished that that nation, racked by a war of insurgency and beset by its neighbors to the north, has not already emerged, full-blown, as a perfect model of two-party democracy

In North Vietnam today--North Vietnam--there are no candidates; there are no elections; there are no attacks on the North Vietnam Government, of which I am aware. And it amuses me that they are not even attacked here sometimes. 
We also, I think, should take judicial notice, without being critical and without being fearful, that by exercising our rights under the first amendment that we should call to the attention of the people that the folks that are doing the most to keep us from having a fair and free election in Vietnam today are the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese themselves. There may be a time when their terroristic efforts could be brought to the attention of the American people





358 - The President's News Conference
August 18, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I would be glad to consider and discuss any proposal that would indicate it would lead to productive discussions that might bring about peace in that area of the world. 
I am very happy that Chief of State Thieu and Prime Minister Ky indicate that after the election they are hopeful conditions would be such that productive discussions and negotiations could take place. 
The United States is very anxious to meet with the representatives of the North Vietnamese Government at any time, at a mutually agreed place, to try to agree on some plan that will resolve these differences. 
We have made a number of proposals ourselves. As of this moment, there has not been communicated to us any change of position any different from that reflected in Ho Chi Minh's letter of several weeks ago. 
We would, of course, welcome any indication on the part of the North Vietnamese that they would agree to a cease-fire, that they would agree to negotiations, that they would agree that if we had a bombing pause that they would not take advantage of that pause to increase our men killed in action. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I think there are those who are taking a pretty tough drubbing out there, who would like for our folks to believe there is a stalemate. But I haven't been there. I can't personally say that I have observed all the action that has taken place. 
General Westmoreland is there. I have sent General Wheeler there within the month. 
General Johnson, the Chief of Staff of our Army, has just returned from there. 
General Larsen, a very able general who has been in the II Corps now for 2 years, has just returned from there.2 
All of these men think that the stalemate charge is nothing more than propaganda
The evidence has been quite clear, we think, that the strikes were made against the major military staging areas and lines of communication where the enemy has been concentrating his supplies and troops. The transportation routes and bridges over which those troops have been moved against our men have been hit. 
We think that these targets are directly related to the enemy's capacity to move material into South Vietnam to kill American boys. 
The targets to us were clearly identifiable. They were carefully selected. They were all within North Vietnam. 
The strikes were made by the most highly trained pilots that we had. They employed every human and every technical precaution to insure that the ordnance fell on target. It did. 
While everyone is entitled to his opinion-a good many of them express it--the tougher the going gets, the more difficult it will be for some to stay with us and go all the way, and last it out. 
Nevertheless, we believe that if we are going to be there, it is essential to do everything we can to protect the men we have there. 
We are going to try to provide the maximum deterrent at the minimum loss. 




375 - The President's News Conference
September 1, 1967

Roughly speaking--and this is subject to some adjustment--there are in the neighborhood of some 350 principal, significant targets that the President has seriously considered from the JCS list. Approximately 300 of those have been authorized. So six out of seven have been authorized. 
Of those 300 authorized, all the civilians and all the military have agreed on them. Their opinion has varied from time to time. There has been some little difference of opinion--the President may feel this way and the Secretary of State may feel another way; or they may agree and the Secretary of Defense agrees with them, and maybe the Joint Chiefs feel that this is more important than the other. 
Some of them don't have the viewpoint on how it might affect our overall political situation in the world, and so forth. All of those things are considered.
But in 300 of the 350 instances there has been general agreement. 
The 50 left are in very strategic areas, primarily the port of Haiphong, Hanoi, and the buffer zone. The decisions to bomb those other 50 targets have not been made. 
Before the President acts on them, he will carefully consider the views of his principal military advisers, such as the Joint Chiefs; his principal political advisers, the Secretary of State; his principal deputy in military matters, the Secretary of Defense
THE PRESIDENT. The recommendations that we get from time to time are to authorize specific targets. When those meetings conclude, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, and the President have as of now been in agreement with each other. 




384 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Presidential Unit Citation to the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) and Attached Units.
September 15, 1967

In one critical month there in the fall of 1965, American troops were locked in major combat with regular forces from North Vietnam. 
When that month was over, the emerging shape of what we now know to be a certain truth could be seen: The enemy can never win Vietnam by armed conquest



407 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor to Sgt. David C. Dolby, USA.
September 28, 1967
We recognize and have always recognized that there can be no simple military solution to the problems of Southeast Asia. But we have also had to face the hard reality that only military power can bar aggression and can make a political solution possible. 
We wish for nothing more than a swift and honorable resolution of our differences in Vietnam. 
We have offered to talk any time, anywhere. But until there is a response that might lead to a just political settlement, we must and we willfight to prevent others from imposing their military solution on the people of South Vietnam and Southeast Asia. 
Until the day comes when we lay down our arms and deal in good faith with North Vietnam across a conference table, brave young men like David Dolby will have to fight in order to assure others their freedom



409 - Address on Vietnam Before the National Legislative Conference, San Antonio, Texas.
September 29, 1967

Vietnam is also the scene of a powerful aggression that is spurred by an appetite for conquest. 
It is the arena where Communist expansionism is most aggressively at work in the world today--where it is crossing international frontiers in violation of international agreements; where it is killing and kidnaping; where it is ruthlessly attempting to bend free people to its will. 
Into this mixture of subversion and war, of terror and hope, America has entered-with its material power and with its moral commitment. Why? 
Why should three Presidents and the elected representatives of our people have chosen to defend this Asian nation more than 10,000 miles from American shores? 
We cherish freedom--yes. We cherish self-determination for all people--yes. We abhor the political murder of any state by another, and the bodily murder of any people by gangsters of whatever ideology. And for 27 years--since the days of lend-lease--we have sought to strengthen free people against domination by aggressive foreign powers. 
But the key to all that we have done is really our own security. At times of crisis-before asking Americans to fight and die to resist aggression in a foreign land--every American President has finally had to answer this question: 
Is the aggression a threat--not only to the immediate victim--but to the United States of America and to the peace and security of the entire world of which we in America are a very vital part? 
That is the question which Dwight Eisenhower and John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson had to answer in facing the issue in Vietnam. 
That is the question that the Senate of the United States answered by a vote of 82 to 1 when it ratified and approved the SEATO treaty in 1955, and to which the Members of the United States Congress responded in a resolution that it passed in 1964 by a vote of 504 to 2, "... the United States is, therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to take all necessarysteps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom." 
Those who tell us now that we should abandon ourcommitment--that securing South Vietnam from armed domination is not worth the price we are paying--must also answer this question. And the test they must meet is this: What would be the consequences of letting armed aggression against South Vietnam succeed? What would follow in the time ahead? What kind of world are they prepared to live in 5 months or 5 years from tonight? 
For those who have borne the responsibility for decision during these past m years, the stakes to us have seemed clear--and have seemed high. 
President Dwight Eisenhower said in 1959: 
"Strategically, South Vietnam's capture by the Communists would bring their power several hundred miles into a hitherto free region. The remaining countries in Southeast Asia would be menaced by a great flanking movement. The freedom of 12 million people would be lost immediately, and that of 150 million in adjacent lands would be seriously endangered. The loss of South Vietnam would set in motion a crumbling process that could, as it progressed, have grave consequences for us and for freedom .... " 
And President John F. Kennedy said in 1962: 
"... withdrawal in the case of Vietnam and the case of Thailand might mean a cob lapse of the entire area."
A year later, he reaffirmed that: 
"We are not going to withdraw from that effort. In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse not only of South Vietnam, but Southeast Asia. So we are going to stay there," said President Kennedy. 
This is not simply an American viewpoint, I would have you legislative leaders know. I am going to call the roll now of those who live in that part of the world--in the great arc of Asian and Pacific nations--and who bear the responsibility for leading their people, and the responsibility for the fate of their people. 
The President of the Philippines had this to say:
"Vietnam is the focus of attention now ....It may happen to Thailand or the Philippines, or anywhere, wherever there is misery, disease, ignorance....For you to renounce your position of leadership in Asia is to allow the Red Chinese to gobble up all of Asia."
The Foreign Minister of Thailand said:
"(The American) decision will go down in history as the move that prevented the world from having to face another major conflagration."
The Prime Minister of Australia said:
"We are there because while Communist aggression persists the whole of Southeast Asia is threatened."
President Park of Korea said: 
"For the first time in our history, we decided to dispatch our combat troops overseas... because in our belief any aggression against the Republic of Vietnam represented a direct and grave menace against the security and peace of free Asia, and therefore directly jeopardized the very security and freedom of our own people." 
The Prime Minister of Malaysia warned his people that if the United States pulled out of South Vietnam, it would go to the Communists, and after that, it would be only a matter of time until they moved against neighboring states.
The Prime Minister of New Zealand said: "We can thank God that America at least regards aggression in Asia with the same concern as it regards aggression in Europe-and is prepared to back up its concern with action." 
The Prime Minister of Singapore said:
"I feel the fate of Asia--South and Southeast Asia--will be decided in the next few years by what happens in Vietnam." 
I cannot tell you tonight as your President-with certainty--that a Communist conquest of South Vietnam would be followed by a Communist conquest of Southeast Asia. But I do know there are North Vietnamese troops in Laos. I do know that there are North Vietnamese trained guerrillas tonight in northeast Thailand. I do know that there are Communist-supported guerrilla forces operating in Burma. And a Communist coup was barely averted in Indonesia, the fifth largest nation in the world. 
So your American President cannot tell you--with certainty--that a Southeast Asia dominated by Communist .power would bring a third world war much closer to terrible reality. One could hope that this would not be so. 
But all that we have learned in this tragic century strongly suggests to me that it would be so. As President of the United States, I am not prepared to gamble on the chance that it is not so. I am not prepared to risk the security--indeed, the survival--of this American Nation on mere hope and wishful thinking. I am convinced that by seeing this struggle through now, we are greatly reducing the chances of a much larger war--perhaps a nuclear war. I would rather stand in Vietnam, in our time, and by meeting this danger now, and facing up to it, thereby reduce the danger for our children and for our grandchildren. 
I want to turn now to the struggle in Vietnam itself. 
There are questions about this difficult war that must trouble every really thoughtful person. I am going to put some of these questions. And I am going to give you the very best answers that I can give you. 
The people wanted an elected, responsive government. They wanted it strongly enough to brave a vicious campaign of Communist terror and assassination to vote for it. It has been said that they killed more civilians in 4 weeks trying to keep them from voting before the election than our American bombers have killed in the big cities of North Vietnam in bombing military targets. 
There is progress in the war itself, steady progress considering the war that we are fighting; rather dramatic progress considering the situation that actually prevailed when we sent our troops there in 1965; when we intervened to prevent the dismemberment of the country by the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese. 
The campaigns of the last year drove the enemy from many of their major interior bases. The military victory almost within Hanoi's grasp in 1965 has now been denied them. The grip of the Vietcong on the people is being broken. 
Since ourcommitment of major forces in July 1965 the proportion of the population living under Communist control has been reduced to well under 20 percent. Tonight the secure proportion of the population has grown from about 45 percent to 65 percent-and in the contested areas, the tide continues to run with us. 
But the struggle remains hard. The South Vietnamese have suffered severely, as have we--particularly in the First Corps area in the north, where the enemy has mounted his heaviest attacks, and where his lines of communication to North Vietnam are shortest. Our casualties in the war have reached about 13,500 killed in action, and about 85,000 wounded. Of those 85,000 wounded, we thank God that 79,000 of the 85,000 have been returned, or will return to duty shortly. Thanks to our great American medical science and the helicopter. 
I know there are other questions on your minds, and on the minds of many sincere, troubled Americans: "Why notnegotiate now?" so many ask me. The answer is that we and our South Vietnamese allies are wholly prepared to negotiate tonight. 
I am ready to talk with Ho Chi Minh, and other chiefs of state concerned, tomorrow. 
I am ready to have Secretary Rusk meet with their foreign minister tomorrow. 
I am ready to send a trusted representative of America to any spot on this earth to talk in public or private with a spokesman of Hanoi. 
We have twice sought to have the issue of Vietnam dealt with by the United Nations-and twice Hanoi has refused. 
Our desire to negotiate peace--through the United Nations or out--has been made very, very clear to Hanoi--directly and many times through third parties. 
As we have told Hanoi time and time and time again, the heart of the matter is really this: The United States is willing to stop all aerial and naval bombardment of North Vietnam when this will lead promptly to productive discussions. We, of course, assume that while discussions proceed, North Vietnam would not take advantage of the bombing cessation or limitation. 
But Hanoi has notaccepted any of these proposals. 
So it is by Hanoi's choice--and not ours, and not the rest of the world's--that the war continues. 
Why, in the face of military and political progress in the South, and the burden of our bombing in the North, do they insist and persist with the war? 
From many sources the answer is the same. They still hope that the people of the United States will not see this struggle through to the very end. As one Western diplomat reported to me only this week-he had just been in Hanoi--"They believe their staying power is greater than ours and that they can't lose." A visitor from a Communist capital had this to say: "They expect the war to be long, and that the Americans in the end will be defeated by a breakdown in morale, fatigue, and psychological factors." The Premier of North Vietnam said as far back as 1962: "Americans do not like long, inconclusive war .... Thus we are sure to win in the end."
Are the North Vietnamese right about us? 
I think not. No. I think they are wrong. I think it is the common failing of totalitarian regimes that they cannot really understand the nature of our democracy: 
--They mistake dissent for disloyalty.
--They mistake restlessness for a rejection of policy.
--They mistake a few committees for a country.
--They misjudge individual speeches for public policy. 
They are no better suited to judge the strength and perseverance of America than the Nazi and the Stalinist propagandists were able to judge it. It is a tragedy that they must discover these qualities in the American people, and discover them through a bloody war.
And, soon or late, they will discover them. In the meantime, it shall be our policy to continue to seek negotiations--confident that reason will some day prevail; that Hanoi will realize that it just can never win; that it will turn away from fighting and start building for its own people. 
Since World War II, this Nation has met and has mastered many challenges--challenges in Greece and Turkey, in Berlin, in Korea, in Cuba. 
We met them because brave men were willing to risk their lives for their nation's security. And braver men have never lived than those who carry our colors in Vietnam at this very hour. 
The price of these efforts, of course, has been heavy. But the price of not having made them at all, not having seen them through, in my judgment would have been vastly greater. 
Our goal has been the same--in Europe, in Asia, in our own hemisphere. It has been--and it is now--peace. 
And peace cannot be secured by wishes; peace cannot be preserved by noble words and pure intentions. "Enduring peace," Franklin D. Roosevelt said, "cannot be bought at the cost of other people's freedom." 
The late President Kennedy put it precisely in November 1961, when he said: "We are neither warmongers nor appeasers, neither hard nor soft. We are Americans determined to defend the frontiers of freedom by an honorable peace if peace is possible but by arms if arms are used against us." 
The true peace-keepers in the world tonight are not those who urge us to retire from the field in Vietnam--who tell us to try to find the quickest, cheapest exit from that tormented land, no matter what the consequences to us may be. 
The true peace-keepers are those men who stand out there on the DMZ at this very hour, taking the worst that the enemy can give. The true peace-keepers are the soldiers who are breaking the terrorist's grip around the villages of Vietnam--the civilians who are bringing medical care and food and education to people who have already suffered a generation of war. 
And so I report to you that we are going to continue to press forward. Two things we must do. Two things we shall do. 
First, we must not mislead the enemy. Let him not think that debate and dissent will produce wavering and withdrawal. For I can assure you they won't. Let him not think that protests will produce surrender. Because they won't. Let him not think that he will wait us out. For he won't




411 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
September 30, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I will let that speech stand for itself. I don't agree, necessarily, with the first part of your statement, that in the past when I only referred to it I referred to it in a certain way. That is your statement and not mine. 
The statement last night has been made before. It was made, as I said, time and time again. It was made in recent press conferences. 
I think you were present when I made substantially the same statement. It represents official Government policy, namely, that we are trying every way we can to find any way to sit down at any time, any place, with these people and talk about the possibilities of peace. 
We, a number of times, have specified the different ways we thought that could be done. 
Last night I may have indicated that we would be very specific about stopping the bombing. And I developed that some by speaking about the timing, the promptness of the discussions, the productivity of the discussions, and the situation that we would expect to exist. 
I don't think I would want to elaborate on it any more than I did last night, or any more than I did in previous references by the President and by various other public officials. 
I did not intend last night--I did not feel that I had any requirement to submit only new material. I tried to discuss the general Government policy and to explain to all the people some of the things that I felt had not gotten through to them. And that was one of them. 
But I did not mean that I felt the criteria of the speech had to be something new in it. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I haven't read everything that has come in. To my knowledge, we haven't heard from them. 
If you are asking about North Vietnam, the answer is, to my knowledge, no. 




495 - The President's News Conference
November 17, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. North Vietnam has responded. Their statement this week in the Hanoi newspaper in response to my statement from the Enterprise is very clear and very compelling. It should answer any person in this country who has ever felt that stopping the bombing alone would bring us to the negotiating table. 
Hanoi made it very clear in response to my appeal from the Enterprise that their position, in effect, was the same as it has always been. It was the same as enunciated in Ho Chi Minh's letter to me which Ho Chi Minh made public. 
There are some hopeful people and there are some naive people in this country--and there are some political people. 
But anyone who really wants to know what the position of North Vietnam is should read what the spokesmen of North Vietnam say. 
That is best summarized in Mr. Ho Chi Minh's letter to the President that he made public, that is on the record, that he has never changed. 
So all of these hopes, dreams, and idealistic people going around are misleading and confusing and weakening our position. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would prefer to handle our negotiations through diplomatic channels with whomsoever we may negotiate. 
I don't think this is the place to do our negotiating. We are very anxious to find a solution that will bring an end to the war. 
As we have stated so many times, we are ready to meet and discuss that with the officials of Hanoi and the Vietcong will have no problem in having their voice fully heard and considered. 
But I think that it would be better if we would wait until opportunity develops along that line and then do it through our trained diplomats
We made our statement to the world of what we would do if we had Communist aggression in that part of the world in 1954. 
We said we would stand with those people in the face of common danger. 
The time came when we had to put up or shut up. We put up. And we are there. We don't march out and have a big battle each day in a guerrilla war. It is a new kind of war for us. So it doesn't move that fast. 
Summarizing and trying to be fully responsive to your question in the time allotted, we are moving more like this [indicating gradual rise]. They are moving more like this [indicating decline], instead of straight up and straight down. 
We are making progress. We are pleased with the results that we are getting. 
We are inflicting greater losses than we are taking. 
Amidst the horrors of war--and more people have been killed trying to vote in South Vietnam than have been killed by bombs in North Vietnam, according to the North Vietnam figures--in the midst of all the horrors of war, in guerrilla fighting in South Vietnam, we have had five elections in a period of a little over 14 months.
There was great doubt whether we could have any. It took us from 1776 to 1789--not 13 months but 13 years--to get a Constitution with our Anglo-Saxon background and all the training we had. 
To think that here in the midst of war, when the grenades are popping like firecrackers all around you, that two-thirds or three-fourths of the people would register and vote, and have 5 elections in 13 months--and through the democratic process select people at the local level, a constituent assembly, a house of representatives, a senate, a president and a vice president-that is encouraging. 
The fact that the population under free control has constantly risen, and that under Communist control has constantly gone down, is a very encouraging sign. 
The improvement that has been made by the South Vietnamese themselves in putting in reforms, in announcing other programs, and in improving their own Army, is a matter of great satisfaction to Ambassador Bunker and to General Westmoreland. 
We have a lot to do yet. A great many mistakes have been made. We take two steps forward, and we slip back one. It is not all perfect by any means. 
There are a good many days when we get a C-minus instead of an A-plus. 
But overall, we are making progress. We are satisfied with that progress. Our allies are pleased with that progress. Every country that I know in that area that is familiar with what is happening thinks it is absolutely essential that Uncle Sam keep his word and stay there until we can find an honorable peace. 
If they have any doubts about it, Mr. Ho Chi Minh--who reads our papers and who listens to our radio, who looks at our television-if he has any doubts about it, I want to disillusion him this morning. 
We keep ourcommitments. Our people are going to support the men who are there. The men there are going to bring us an honorable peace




518 - The President's News Conference
December 4, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I have no comment on the story. I have not seen it. I think that my last press conference makes it pretty clear what our situation is there. And I doubt that when and if a situation of that kind comes about you will be reading it over the ticker before we know it

THE PRESIDENT. I wouldn't make any comments on that in a press conference. I don't have what the General said. And I don't want to be passing judgment on his comments anyway.
Whatever military action would be desirable and fitting under the circumstances, I would rather handle it through General Westmoreland than NBC



534 - Remarks to Delegates to the National Convention, AFL-CIO.
December 12, 1967

I remind all of you again tonight, and my fellow Americans who may be viewing this proceeding, of our exchange of correspondence with Ho Chi Minh. The North Vietnamese themselves released my letter on March 21st. In it, the President of the United States, on behalf of the United States, made what we thought was a fair and a firm offer. 
I said: "There is one good way to overcome this problem and move forward in the search for a peaceful settlement. That is for us to arrange for direct talks between trusted representatives in a secure setting and away from the glare of publicity .... 
"As to the site of the bilateral discussions I propose, there are several possibilities. We could, for example, have our representatives meet in Moscow, where contacts have already occurred. They could meet in some other country such as Burma. You may have other sites in mind, and I would try to meet your suggestions .... " 
Can we be any more specific? Hanoi has spurned that olive branch. They answered with a rude "No," and they have repeated it time after disappointing time. Until they relent, until they see room for compromise and area for agreement, we must stand firm and we must stand unafraid. And we will. 
Peace will come---I am convinced of that. But until peace does come, I will continue, with the support of our loyal, determined people, to hold the line that we have drawn against aggression--and to hold it firm and to hold it steady



536 - Remarks by the President at a Press Briefing by Col. Daniel James, Jr., USAF, Following His Report on Vietnam.
December 13, 1967

COLONEL JAMES had in excess of 100 missions in Korea. He is a fighter pilot who has had almost the equivalent of that in Southeast Asia. He has had some 78 or 79 missions over North Vietnam

I think I have covered generally what we talked about. I will leave and take another appointment which I have. If you have any questions of Colonel James, I guess if he can take care of the North Vietnamese he can take care of you. I don't know



554 - "A Conversation With the President," Joint Interview for Use by Television Networks
December 19, 1967

THE PRESIDENT. I have just explained what I thought would be a fair solution. I will repeat it as briefly and as succinctly as I can.
The demilitarized zone must be respected as the 1954 agreements require. The unity of Vietnam as a whole must be a matter for peaceful adjustment and negotiation.
The North Vietnamese forces must get out of Laos and stop infiltrating Laos. That is what the 1962 agreement required, and it must be respected

I think that is a statesmanlike position. And I hope the other side will respond. That is why or statement in early December said we believe that the South Vietnamese must work out their own future, acting through electoral processes of the kind carried forward in the last 2 years. 
It is our judgment that this war could be ended in a matter of weeks if the other side would face these five simple facts, and if some of our own people here in this country would encourage that that be done instead of broadcasting alarms that may give false signals both to Hanoi and to the Vietcong
THE PRESIDENT. I think that the thing we must bear in mind, that what happens in South Vietnam is up to the people of South Vietnam, not to North Vietnam, not to China, the Soviet Union, or the United States--but the people of South Vietnam. 
We are prepared to have every man in South Vietnam under their constitutional government, one man-one vote--for those people themselves to determine the kind of government they want. We think we know what that determination would be from the 70 percent who are registered and the 60 percent who have voted. It is a matter for them to determine. 
I think that we might add one other thing here: When Mr. Reynolds says what are the minimum conditions for this or that, we don't want to get sparring with each other. 
But I can say that so far as the United States is concerned, we are ready to stop fighting tonight if they are ready to stop fighting. But we are not ready to stop our side of the war only to encourage them to escalate their side of the war. 
We will reciprocate and meet any move that they make, but we are not going to be so softheaded and pudding headed as to say that we will stop our half of the war and hope and pray that they stop theirs. 
Now, we have tried that in some instances. We have leaned over backwards. Every time we have, they have escalated their efforts and they have killed our soldiers. We have got no result from it. A burnt child dreads the fire. 
But if you want us to stop our bombing, you have to ask them to stop their bombing, stop their hand grenades, stop their mortars. 
At San Antonio I laid out the formula and I said we will stop bombing immediately "provided you will have prompt and productive discussions." 
Now, that is about as far as anyone can go. That is as far as anyone should go. That is as far as we are going. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, it is my feeling that our position in the world is very clearly known. If it is not, I have tried to repeat it enough tonight that the people can understand it. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think that Hanoi feels that if they can hold out long enough, that they will not win a military victory against General Westmoreland. They haven't done that. They can't point to one single victory they won from our Marines, or from our Air, or from our Navy, or from our Army. 
They think, though, that they can repeat what happened to them with the French; that if their will is strong and they continue to remain firm, that they will develop enough sympathy and understanding in this country, and hatred for war in this country, that their will will outlast our will. 
I don't think that is true. I think in due time, if our people will understand and recognize what is happening, I think they will help me prove it is not true. 
THE PRESIDENT. Without going into your statements as to my views, I would say this: We are not sure just at this point of all that motivates the Chinese, or the Russians, or any of the other Communists who are supporting the North Vietnamese




565 - Remarks to a Group of American Combat Pilots at the Royal Thai Air Force Base, Khorat, Thailand.
December 23, 1967

Through the use of air power, a mere handful of you men--as military forces are really reckoned--are pinning down several hundred thousand--more than half a million--North Vietnamese. You are increasing the cost of infiltration. You are imposing a very high rate of attrition when the enemy is engaged--and you are giving him no rest when he withdraws. Air power is providing the mobility which meets and matches the stealth of an enemy whose tactics are based on sudden, hit-and-run attacks. 
Working with the Vietnamese and our other fighting allies, we are defeating this aggression. We are doing it with a proportion of forces at least half that usually required to cope with a guerrilla. enemy of such size. The use we are making of air power--in all its forms--is a major reason the plans of the enemy are now doomed to complete failure. 
It is a factor of utmost importance to the future of the peace of Asia--and for that matter, the peace of the entire world--that aggressors never again will be able to assume that aggression through cruel, brutal, and sadistic wars of national liberation will ever be either economic or successful. 
Air power is denying aggression access to cheap success or to ultimate victory




1 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
January 1, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. The answer is no, although I don't want to get into the process of eliminating what we discussed and what we didn't discuss. 
But we did not discuss specifically his sending any mission. We discussed a number of subjects where--if he decided, if His Holiness decided, he wanted to act in that area--that could callfor such action. But we did not specifically discuss it. 
THE PRESIDENT. We are familiar with those reports. As of now, they are just reports. We are evaluating them. They come from a newspaperman who has written in this field heretofore. We have found it advisable to carefully check the statements in the report. We are doing that now



34 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Distinguished Service Medal to Gen. Wallace M. Greene, Jr., USMC.
January 26, 1968

The heroic performance of the Marines who fight to protect each of us in Vietnam--who are now resisting a massive attack from the North at this very hour--speaks more than I can ever say for the spirit and the courage of 76,000 separate men. But it also says something about the man who leads those men and the man who prepares those men for the call they must answer. His mark is on each one of them. His brand is there.



48 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor to Maj. Merlyn H. Dethlefsen, USAF.
February 1, 1968

Major Dethlefsen had a most vital mission last March. His mission was to knock out a critical missile site in North Vietnam

These are the men who have rewritten the rule book and the flight book of aerial warfare. These men are comparatively few in number, but each day they are pinning down from 500,000 to 700,000 North Vietnamese, and they number only a few hundred

Let those who would stop the bombing answer this question: "What would the North Vietnamese be doing if we stopped the bombing and let them alone?" 
The answer, I think, is clear. The enemy force in the South would be larger. It would be better equipped. The war would be harder. The losses would be greater. The difficulties would be longer. And of one thing you can be sure: It would cost many more American lives.



50 - Filmed Conversation of the President and George Meany, AFL-CIO President and Chairman of COPE.
February 2, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Meany, our people are peace-loving people. We seek no war. We want peace in the world. But we have learned some things from participation in World War I and World War II and the Korean war and other disturbances in recent years, and that is you cannot successfully appease an aggressor. If you run and if you hide and if you let aggression spread, the time comes when you must face up to it sooner or later. 
Now, we have the will for peace. We have the machinery for peace. No one in the world wants peace more than I do. I live with war 24 hours a day. I read the casualty lists every morning. But I know that until the enemy, the Communist enemy, is willing to genuinely and sincerely sit down and talk about peace in good faith, that we shouldn't hold out all these illusions and all these hopes that can't be realized to our people. 
So the best road to peace that I know of is to remain strong, and remain firm, and to stand on principle. We haven't had an appeaser President in my lifetime. Every President that has preceded me has stood on the principle that when we were called upon to resist aggression and to perform under the treaties that this country had entered into, that the word of the United States could be depended on. As long as I am President, we are going to keep our word. 
We are not going to let any of our nations who are bound to us by treaties and alliances be gobbled up by any would-be conqueror, any would-be dictator, while we stand by under an umbrella. Now, if they want to talk peace and if they will agree to self-determination in South Vietnam, we are willing to meet them at the conference table tomorrow. 
We said in San Antonio, we will stop our bombing now if you will come and have a prompt discussion and a productive discussion in good faith. You can make all the proposals you want to. We will make our proposals. We will exchange views.
But they have notaccepted that proposal. Now, I don't know how much further I can go. I don't think it would be in the interest of this Nation for us to stop our bombing, only to have them to continue theirs. A bomb dropped from a bicycle can kill as many people as a bomb dropped from a plane. It is rather ridiculous for some of our people to say "You ought to stop bombing," and then when I say, "Well, will we have a prompt discussion?" they say, "We don't know." 
We don't have that answer. Will they have a productive discussion? Well, we don't know. Will they talk about just North Vietnam? That's what's indicated. That problem is in South Vietnam. 
So we must pursue and explore the meaning of these so-called offers so that we don't buy a pig in a poke and so we don't repeat the errors of Panmunjom and we don't let the Communists lead us down a road that we don't know where we are going




51 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1968

We have known for several months, now, that the Communists planned a massive winter-spring offensive. We have detailed information on Ho Chi Minh's order governing that offensive. Part of it is called a general uprising. 
We know the object was to overthrow the constitutional government in Saigon and to create a situation in which we and the Vietnamese would be willing to accept the Communist-dominated coalition government. 
Another part of that offensive was planned as a massive attack across the frontiers of South Vietnam by North Vietnamese units. We have already seen the general uprising. General Westmoreland's headquarters report the Communists appear to have lost over 10,000 men killed and some 2,300 detained. The United States has lost 249 men killed. The Vietnamese, who had to carry the brunt of the fighting in the cities, lost 553 killed as of my most recent report from the Westmoreland headquarters. 
There were also a number of attacks on United States airfields throughout the country. We have confirmed the loss of 15 fixed-wing aircraft, and 23 helicopters were destroyed. A good many more were damaged but will be returned to service. 
This is a small proportion of our aircraft and helicopters available in that area. Secretary McNamara, General Westmoreland, and the joint Chiefs of Staff do not think that our military operations will be materially affected. 
The biggest fact is that the stated purposes of the general uprising have failed. Communist leaders counted on popular support in the cities for their effort. They found little or none. On the other hand, there have been civilian casualties and disruption of public services. lust before I came into the room, I read a long cable from Ambassador Bunker which described the vigor with which the Vietnamese Government and our own people are working together to deal with the problems of restoring civilian services and order in all of the cities. 
In the meanwhile, we may at this very moment be on the eve of a major enemy offensive in the area of Khe Sanh and generally around the Demilitarized Zone. 
We have known for some time that this offensive was planned by the enemy. Over recent weeks I have been in close touch with General Westmoreland, and over recent days in very close touch with all of our Joint Chiefs of Staff to make sure that every single thing that General Westmoreland believed that he needed at this time was available to him, and that our Joint Chiefs believe that his strategy was sound, his men were sure, and they were amply supplied
THE PRESIDENT. NO. I would think that that statement is about as good as I could make on that general subject. That accurately describes what has been going on and what is going on. But I do not have any success or results to report on it. 
THE PRESIDENT. I am sure that we will make adjustments to what we are doing there. 
So far as changing our basic strategy, the answer would be no. I think that there will be changes made here and there as a result of experience that comes from efforts such as they have made. Our best experts think that they had two purposes in mind. 
First was a military success. That has been a complete failure. That is not to say that they have not disrupted services. It is just like when we have a riot in a town or when we have a very serious strike, or bridges go out, or lights--power failures and things. They have disrupted services. A few bandits can do that in any city in the land. 
Obviously, they have in the Vietcong hundreds and thousands, so it is nothing unexpected to anticipate that they will try in cooperation with their friends from the North to coordinate their activities. 
The ferocity and the violence, the deception and the lack of concern for the basic elements that appeal to human beings--they may have shocked a lot of people in that respect. 
But the ability to do what they have done has been anticipated, prepared for, and met. 
Their general conclusion is that as a military movement it has been a failure. 
Now, their second objective, obviously from the--what you can see from not only Vietnam but from other Communist capitals-even from some of our unknowing people here at home--is a psychological victory. 
We have to realize that in moments of tenseness and trial--as we will have today and as we have had in the past days--that there will be a great effort to exploit that and let that substitute for military victory they have not achieved. 
I do not believe when the American people know the facts, when the world knows the facts, and when the results are laid out for them to examine, I do not believe that they will achieve a psychological victory. I do not want to be interpreted as unduly optimistic at all. I would rather wait and let the facts speak for themselves because there are many things that one far removed from the scene cannot anticipate. 
In all of the battles, there are many disappointments for the commanders and even the commanders in chief. 
So I think that at this very critical stage I would much prefer to be played low key than to give any false assurances. I can only say this: that based on the best military advice that I have, I feel confident that the men will give a good accounting of themselves. 
THE PRESIDENT. I do not have evidence that would say that they are definitely, positively one and the same here because I cannot prove that. Practically every expert I have talked to on Korea and North Vietnam and the Communist operation--all of them, I think without exception, believe there is a definite connection. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have tried to explore every suggestion made by enemy and friend. I must say that in retrospect I do not think we have overlooked anything, and I do not think that we have found anything that would give an impartial judge reason to be encouraged. 
THE PRESIDENT. We do that every week. I see nothing that would indicate that that shouldn't be done. We must do it all the time to try to keep up, and to be sure we have not made errors and mistakes. If you are saying, have we felt that what happened could not happen, the answer is no. As a matter of fact, Mr. Bailey,8 if you have seen any of the intelligence reports, the information has been very clear that two things would happen: 
One is that there would be a general uprising, as I stated. 
Two, there would be a general invasion and attempt to secure military victory, and that the objective would be to get a military victory and a psychological victory. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I see nothing in the developments that would indicate that the evaluation that I have had of this situation throughout the month should be changed. I do think that the second phase is imminent. What we have expected is upon us. We have gone through the first phase of it. We will have to see what happens in the second phase. If it comes out as expected, I think I can give you a better answer to your question when it is over with. 
I do not want to prophesy what is going to happen, although we feel reasonably sure of our strength. 


79 - The President's News Conference
February 16, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We look for them every day. 
I would like to be able to say "Yes." In the last few days, preparatory to closing out the statement that Secretary Rusk issued yesterday, I believe, or the day before, we reviewed Hanoi's actions in response to more than 20-odd proposals made by well-intentioned and interested people. 
We reviewed the many overtures that we had made, including the most recent one where we thought we went as far as honorable men could go--the San Antonio proposal. 
As near as I am able to detect, Hanoi has not changed its course of conduct since the very first response it made. 
Sometimes they will change "will" to "would", or "shall" to "should", or something of that kind. But the answer is all the same. 
While we were prepared to go into the Tet truce, they were moving thousands of men from the North into the South for the subsequent attacks on that sacred holiday. I think that ought to be an answer that any elementary school boy or girl could understand. 
If you want to go to the negotiating table, if you want to talk instead of fight, you don't move in thousands of people with hundreds of trucks through the night to try to catch people--innocent civilians--by surprise m the city, anticipating a general uprising. 
We are familiar with all the approaches that have been made to them, and we have encouraged them all the time. But when it is all said and done, I don't want to leave the American people under any illusions, and I don't want to deceive them. 
I don't think Hanoi is any more ready to negotiate today than it was a year ago, 2 years ago, or 3 years ago. I don't think it has been at any time during any of that period
I have told you that I have never felt that they have changed their position, modified it, or moderated it



81 - Remarks During a Weekend Tour of Military Installations (February 17-18, 1968)
February 17, 1968

The answer of the enemy in Vietnam has been pillage. The enemy has launched a major counter offensive against the Government and the people of South Vietnam. He has marshaled his power around the cities of South Vietnam, in I Corps and elsewhere. 
After 2 1/2 years in which he has seen his grip on the people weaken, he has finally decided to try to win now--this year. His aim is to shake the Government of South Vietnam to its foundations, to shake the confidence of the South Vietnamese people, to destroy the will of your people--the American people--to see this struggle through. 
In his first attempt 3 weeks ago, he failed. He did inflict terrible wounds on the people, and he took terrible losses himself. He did prove, again, what the world has long known--that terrorists can strike and can kill without warning before the forces of order can throw them back. 
And now he has struck again. At this very hour, a second wave of terrorists is striking the cities. Our forces are ready. I know they will acquit themselves, as they always have, however tough the battle becomes, and wherever it comes. 
There has never been a finer fighting force wearing the American uniform than you and the one that you are going to join. 
We long to see this bloodshed come to an end. Month after month we sought to find an honorable solution to the struggle that has torn Vietnam for 20 years. The enemy's answer was clear. It is written in the towns and the cities that he struck 3 weeks ago-in the homeless thousands who fled the scenes of battle--in the army that he has massed in the North near the DMZ. 
And our answer--your answer--must be just as clear: unswerving resolution to resist these ruthless attacks, as we have resisted every other. 
Now remember this: You, each of you, represent America's will--Americascommitment [orginally Americas; replaced for Yoshikoder]-in a land where our own security, as well as South Vietnam's freedom, is now facing a deadly challenge. Men who have never been elected to anything are threatening an elected government and the painfully achieved institutions of democracy



129 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Medal of Honor to Maj. Robert J. Modrzejewski and 2d Lt. John J. McGinty III, USMC.
March 12, 1968

Men like these Marines have seen America all through our troubled periods. They have fought with valor, in the early months, the enemy's expanded war, when the regular units of the North Vietnamese Army were beginning to cross the border as aggressors in significant size. 
Today, the enemy force waging destruction south of the DMZ is made up of many, many regular units who have already invaded their neighbor nation from the north. International aggression is open now and it is undisguised. 
The early pretense of attempting to fool some of the people some of the time that this was only a civil war has now had the cloak pulled from around it and even they have abandoned it, as have their spokesmen



169 - The President's News Conference
March 30, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We are always glad to be able to get the release of our prisoners and to be able to reciprocate the actions they take. 
I don't know just how to describe those releases in your terms. You will have to draw your own conclusions there. We are pleased that those exchanges have worked out to the extent they have. We would like to see more of them
THE PRESIDENT. The only information that I know that is available is that it did not return; that it is missing. That is the last information I have




170 - The President's Address to the Nation Announcing Steps To Limit the War in Vietnam and Reporting His Decision Not To Seek Reelection.
March 31, 1968

For years, representatives of our Government and others have traveled the world-seeking to find a basis for peace talks. 
Since last September, they have carried the offer that I made public at San Antonio. That offer was this: 
That the United States would stop its bombardment of North Vietnam when that would lead promptly to productive discussions-and that we would assume that North Vietnam would not take military advantage of our restraint. 
Hanoi denounced this offer, both privately and publicly. Even while the search for peace was going on, North Vietnam rushed their preparations for a savage assault on the people, the government, and the allies of South Vietnam. 
Their attack--during the Tet holidays-failed to achieve its principal objectives.
It did not collapse the elected government of South Vietnam or shatter its army--as the Communists had hoped. 
It did not produce a "general uprising" among the people of the cities as they had predicted. 
The Communists were unable to maintain control of any of the more than 30 cities that they attacked. And they took very heavy casualties. 
But they did compel the South Vietnamese and their allies to move certain forces from the countryside into the cities. 
They caused widespread disruption and suffering. Their attacks, and the battles that followed, made refugees of half a million human beings. 
The Communists may renew their attack any day. 
They are, it appears, trying to make 1968 the year of decision in South Vietnam--the year that brings, if not final victory or defeat, at least a turning point in the struggle. This much is clear: 
If they do mount another round of heavy attacks, they will not succeed in destroying the fighting power of South Vietnam and its allies. 
But tragically, this is also clear: Many men--on both sides of the struggle--will be lost. A nation that has already suffered 20 years of warfare will suffer once again. Armies on both sides will take new casualties. And the war will go on.
There is no need for this to be so.
There is no need to delay the talks that could bring an end to this long and this bloody war. 
Tonight, I renew the offer I made last August--to stop the bombardment of North Vietnam. We ask that talks begin promptly, that they be serious talks on the substance of peace. We assume that during those talks Hanoi will not take advantage of our restraint. 
We are prepared to move immediately toward peace through negotiations. 
So, tonight, in the hope that this action will lead to early talks, I am taking the first step to deescalate the conflict. We are reducing-substantially reducing--the present level of hostilities.
And we are doing so unilaterally, and at once. 
Tonight, I have ordered our aircraft and our naval vessels to make no attacks on North Vietnam, except in the area north of the demilitarized zone where the continuing enemy buildup directly threatens allied forward positions and where the movements of their troops and supplies are clearly related to that threat. 
The area in which we are stopping our attacks includes almost 90 percent of North Vietnam's population, and most of its territory. Thus there will be no attacks around the principal populated areas, or in the food-producing areas of North Vietnam. 
Even this very limited bombing of the North could come to an early end--if our restraint is matched by restraint in Hanoi. But I cannot in good conscience stop all bombing so long as to do so would immediately and directly endanger the lives of our men and our allies. Whether a complete bombing halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by events. 
Our purpose in this action is to bring about a reduction in the level of violence that now exists. 
It is to save the lives of brave men--and to save the lives of innocent women and children. It is to permit the contending forces to move closer to a political settlement. 
Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the means of bringing this ugly war to an end. 
I am designating one of our most distinguished Americans, Ambassador Averell Harriman, as my personal representative for such talks. In addition, I have asked Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson, who returned from Moscow for consultation, to be available to join Ambassador Harriman at Geneva or any other suitable place--just as soon as Hanoi agrees to a conference. 
I callupon President Ho Chi Minh to respond positively, and favorably, to this new step toward peace. 
But if peace does not come now through negotiations, it will come when Hanoi understands that our common resolve is unshakable, and our common strength is invincible. 
Tonight, we and the other allied nations are contributing 600,000 fighting men to assist 700,000 South Vietnamese troops in defending their little country.
Our presence there has always rested on this basic belief: The main burden of preserving their freedom must be carried out by them--by the South Vietnamese themselves. 
That small, beleaguered nation has suffered terrible punishment for more than 20 years. 
I pay tribute once again tonight to the great courage and endurance of its people. South Vietnam supports armed forces tonight of almost 700,000 men--and I call your attention to the fact that this is the equivalent of more than 10 million in our own population. Its people maintain their firm determination to be free of domination by the North. 
Now let me give you my estimate of the chances for peace:
--the peace that will one day stop the bloodshed in South Vietnam,
--that will permit all the Vietnamese people to rebuild and develop their land,
--that will permit us to turn more fully to our own tasks here at home.
I cannot promise that the initiative that I have announced tonight will be completely successful in achieving peace any more than the 30 others that we have undertaken and agreed to in recent years. 
But it is our fervent hope that North Vietnam, after years of fighting that have left the issue unresolved, will now cease its efforts to achieve a military victory and will join with us in moving toward the peace table. 
And there may come a time when South Vietnamese--on both sides--are able to work out a way to settle their own differences by free political choice rather than by war. 
As Hanoi considers its course, it should be in no doubt of our intentions. It must not miscalculate the pressures within our democracy in this election year.
We have no intention of widening this war. 
But the United States will never accept a fake solution to this long and arduous struggle and call it peace. 
No one can foretell the precise terms of an eventual settlement. 
Our objective in South Vietnam has never been the annihilation of the enemy. It has been to bring about a recognition in Hanoi that its objective--taking over the South by force--could not be achieved. 
We think that peace can be based on the Geneva Accords of 1954--under political conditions that permit the South Vietnamese--all the South Vietnamese--to chart their course free of any outside domination or interference, from us or from anyone else. 
So tonight I reaffirm the pledge that we made at Manila--that we are prepared to withdraw our forces from South Vietnam as the other side withdraws its forces to the north, stops the infiltration, and the level of violence thus subsides. 
Our goal of peace and self-determination in Vietnam is directly related to the future of all of Southeast Asia--where much has happened to inspire confidence during the past 10 years. We have done all that we knew how to do to contribute and to help build that confidence. 
I think every American can take a great deal of pride in the role that we have played in bringing this about in Southeast Asia. We can rightly judge--as responsible Southeast Asians themselves do--that the progress of the past 3 years would have been far less likely--if not completely impossible--if America's sons and others had not made their stand in Vietnam. 
At Johns Hopkins University, about 3 years ago, I announced that the United States would take part in the great work of developing Southeast Asia, including the Mekong Valley, for all the people of that region. Our determination to help build a better land-a better land for men on both sides of the present conflict--has not diminished in the least. Indeed, the ravages of war, I think, have made it more urgent than ever. 
So, I repeat on behalf of the United States again tonight what I said at Johns Hopkins--that North Vietnam could take its place in this common effort just as soon as peace comes. 
Over time, a wider framework of peace and security in Southeast Asia may become possible. The new cooperation of the nations of the area could be a foundation-stone. Certainly friendship with the nations of such a Southeast Asia is what the United States seeks--and that is all that the United States seeks. 
One day, my fellow citizens, there will be peace in Southeast Asia. 
But let it never be forgotten: Peace will come also because America sent her sons to help secure it. 
Throughout this entire, long period, I have been sustained by a single principle: that what we are doing now, in Vietnam, is vital not only to the security of Southeast Asia, but it is vital to the security of every American. 
Surely we have treaties which we must respect. Surely we have commitments that we are going to keep. Resolutions of the Congress testify to the need to resist aggression in the world and in Southeast Asia. 
But the heart of our involvement in South Vietnam--under three different presidents, three separate administrations--has always been America's own security. 
And the larger purpose of our involvement has always been to help the nations of Southeast Asia become independent and stand alone, self-sustaining, as members of a great world community--at peace with themselves, and at peace with all others.
With such an Asia, our country--and the world--will be far more secure than it is tonight. 
I believe that a peaceful Asia is far nearer to reality because of what America has done in Vietnam. I believe that the men who endure the dangers of battle--fighting there for us tonight--are helping the entire world avoid far greater conflicts, far wider wars, far more destruction, than this one. 
The peace that will bring them home someday will come. Tonight I have offered the first in what I hope will be a series of mutual moves toward peace. 
I pray that it will not be rejected by the leaders of North Vietnam. I pray that they will accept it as a means by which the sacrifices of their own people may be ended. And I ask your help and your support, my fellow citizens, for this effort to reach across the battlefield toward an early peace. 


172 - Remarks in Chicago Before the National Association of Broadcasters.
April 1, 1968

I pray that the message of peace that I tried so hard to convey last night will be accepted in good faith by the leaders of North Vietnam.



177 - Excerpts of Remarks to a Group of Foreign Editors on a Statement by the Government of North Vietnam.
April 3, 1968

The other night we looked long and hard. We had consulted lots of governments and a great many experts. We tried to take one positive step that could lead to peace and if it were recognized by the offer side, it could lead to another positive step and another one until maybe we could find some way to end this terrible war ....
So, we are now trying to study the [Hanoi] statement and we will make a comment on it. We are very interested in it and if it says what some people think it says, it is something that we are very interested in .



178 - Statement by the President Following Hanoi's Declaration of Readiness To Begin Discussions.
April 3, 1968

TODAY the Government of North Vietnam made a statement which included the following paragraph, and I quote: 
"However, for its part, the Government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam declares its readiness to appoint its representatives to contact the United States representative with a view to determining with the American side the unconditional cessation of the United States bombing raids and all other acts of war against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam so that talks may start." 
Last Sunday night I expressed the position of the United States with respect to peace in Vietnam and Southeast Asia as follows: 
"Now, as in the past, the United States is ready to send its representatives to any forum, at any time, to discuss the means of bringing this war to an end." 
Accordingly, we will establish contact with the representatives of North Vietnam. Consultations with the Government of South Vietnam and our other allies are now taking place. 
So that you may have as much notice as I am able to give you on another matter, I will be leaving tomorrow evening, late, for Honolulu. I will meet with certain of our representatives, American representatives from South Vietnam, for a series of meetings over the weekend in Hawaii.




198 - Remarks at the Iolani Palace in Honolulu.
April 15, 1968

We shall be discussing our diplomatic initiative in seeking talks with North Vietnam. We shall be discussing the readiness of our allied forces to meet every challenge on the battlefield of South Vietnam. 
Both of these paths are essential to our quest for an honorable and secure peace in South Vietnam. 
I know how concerned you are--as I am-that this time, after years of fruitless pauses and proposals, the two sides may get down to serious talks about ending this brutal war. 
I announced 2 weeks ago that we would sharply limit our bombing of North Vietnam and that we were willing to meet at any suitable place to begin talks. Very promptly we proposed four neutral sites-Vientiane, Rangoon, Djakarta, and New Delhi--where both sides have representatives and adequate communications. 
All of these are readily accessible to Hanoi. All of these are located in the region which has the most direct and vitalinterest in the achievement of a stable peace.
Hanoi has given us two messages and has suggested two locations. We have responded by pointing out certain obvious reasons why each of the two sites was not suitable. As of now we have had no response or comment from Hanoi, other than radio statements, about any one of the locations that we have suggested. 
For us, this is not a propaganda exercise. We have sent serious and considered messages aimed at bringing about the earliest possible contact. Ambassador Harriman and Ambassador Vance are ready. What is needed today is an equally serious reply, reacting to our proposals for neutral sites or offering additional suggestions of neutral capitals where both of us have representatives and communications. 
It is now 2 long weeks since I restricted our bombing and urged North Vietnam to come to the conference table. 
We are eager to get on with the task of peacemaking. Precious time is being lost. Asians and Americans alike are ready to let diplomacy go to work--now--without any further delay.



200 - Remarks at the Korean Consulate in Honolulu.
April 17, 1968

And in their benefits and in their development all the nations of Southeast Asia should participate--not just our present allies--but North Vietnam and all human beings in that great region who long for freedom and dignity and liberty



223 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We have been quite concerned with the developments since my March 31st statement, and we have been following them very closely. You may be sure that we are aware and will at all times protect the American interests




241 - Remarks to Members of the Business Council Meeting in Hot Springs, Virginia.
May 11, 1968

The two parties met this morning in Paris for more than 2 hours and agreed on procedures for official conversations between the United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. These official conversations will begin at 10:30 a.m., Monday, May 13



267 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Presidential Unit Citation to the 26th Marines (Reinforced), 3d Marine Division (Reinforced)
May 23, 1968

The 6,000 allied troops faced more than 20,000 determined North Vietnamese. Some say there are no North Vietnamese in that area. 
The North Vietnamese mounted an assault identical to that which ended in their victory at Dienbienphu 14 years ago. But they had not counted on the most overwhelming, intelligent, and effective use of air power in the history of warfare; nor had they counted on the courage and the endurance-and the artillery--of the Marines at Khe Sanh. So unable to conquer, the enemy withdrew. 
The fortress at Khe Sanh straddled critical supply and infiltration routes that the North Vietnamese were using. Route 9, which it commanded, was to be a major avenue for the enemy into populated areas and into the cities of South Vietnam. 
By pinning down--and by decimating-two North Vietnamese divisions, the few thousand Marines and their gallant South Vietnamese allies prevented those divisions from entering other major battles such as those for Hue and Quang Tri. 
I believe that our initiative toward talks with North Vietnam was greatly strengthened by what these men did at Khe Sanh-for they vividly demonstrated to the enemy the utter futility of his attempts to win a military victory in the South. 
All of us in America hope that the road to peace will lead through the talks in Paris. 
But it is still not clear that Hanoi is ready for an early or an honorable peace. 
The flow of infiltrators and of equipment from North Vietnam has never been greater than it is now. There is still very bitter fighting in many areas of South Vietnam. 
There has been no visible lessening of Hanoi's aggressive efforts. In fact, Hanoi is today telling its forces in the South that they must continue their offensive to support their negotiators in Paris. 
For our part, we shall seriously and soberly pursue negotiations toward an honorable and peaceful settlement of this war. But this should also be clear: We shall not be defeated on the battlefield while the talks go on. We shall notpermit the enemy's mortars and rockets to go unanswered and to permit him to achieve a victory that would make a mockery of the negotiations. 
We have faith that an honorable peace can be achieved in Vietnam. But if there must be more fighting before it comes, then we shall not be found wanting



275 - The President's News Conference
May 28, 1968

As you know, he and Ambassador Harriman 2 are associate spokesmen for us in Paris. The other side has sought to use these talks for two purposes: First, to see if we could be pressured to stop the bombing completely in the southern panhandle of North Vietnam, without any compensatory action on their part. 
At the present time, they are pouring men and supplies through this area at an unprecedented rate. The supplies go directly to the battle in South Vietnam. We are destroying something over 20 percent of what is coming through to the South. 
Without our attacks, our men and our allies would be bearing a considerable extra burden. It would be translated into casual' ties--American, South Vietnamese, Australian, Korean, Thai, and Filipino casualties. 
Those casualties have been very heavy, particularly since the Paris talks began, and the stepped-up attacks that they have made. 
Our negotiators, Ambassador Harriman and his associate, Mr. Vance, have made it clear that we have already taken a very major step, as I announced in my March 31 speech,3 both personally and officially, in connection with the bombing of large segments of their population and territory. 
We have withdrawn some 90 percent of the population from the area that we bombed and some 78 percent of the territory. Now we have stopped the bombing of most of the territory and population in North Vietnam. 
We made it clear if North Vietnam responded, if they would show some similar restraint, we are prepared to make further decisions to try to reduce the violence. 
That has been our position since the formula was presented on March 31, which brought about the Paris negotiations. That is our position today, and it will remain our position. 
Second, the other side has been using the occasion of these talks for obviously very wide-ranging propaganda. They have been unwilling to enter into serious, quiet discussion of the conditions for ending the bombing or any other matters of substance. 
On the other hand, Ambassador Harriman and Ambassador Vance have been putting forward a series of constructive proposals, including the reestablishment of an effective demilitarized zone and the implementation of the Laos accord of 1962. 
They have also indicated the principles that we believe should govern a total settlement of the problem, including the withdrawal of forces from South Vietnam and a political settlement. 
I discussed with Ambassador Vance, and a number of my other senior advisers, the positions that had been taken and that we should take in Paris in the future. 
While our men deal with Communist forces in the field, we shall continue patiently to see whether the Paris talks can yield anything in the way of constructive results. 
In our judgment, itistime to move from fantasy and propaganda to the realistic and constructive work of bringing peace to Southeast Asia. 
THE PRESIDENT. Those are my statements. I didn't want to go into the specifics of Mr. Vance's report. I don't think we will. I am not sure that that would contribute anything to the negotiations. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't want to go into Mr. Vance's report or the details of his conversation. As I said to Mr. Lisagor, Mr. Young,7 I don't think anything can come from this that would be helpful. I would not be drawing contrary conclusions though



280 - Remarks Upon Signing the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
May 29, 1968

I assume it is not inappropriate here to observe that back last August we searched our minds and our hearts and our principles and laid down a program which was subsequently announced in San Antonio that we were hopeful would lead to the peace table. 
That program was rejected outright and we searched many other avenues and many other conferences. 
On March 31st, I reached a decision that if we would take the unusual step of exercising great restraint on our own part by eliminating our offensive efforts over 90 percent of the population in North Vietnam and 78 percent of the territory, if we did that unilaterally, without expecting anything from them or asking anything from them, that might lead to the talk table where we could discuss this matter. If we could talk, that might lead to some agreement sometime. 
It was an adventure. There were no guarantees involved about what it would do. But we thought it offered enough hope. I didn't feel that it was a matter that could be involved in partisan-year politics or personal ambition. So for that reason, I said that we will do this to try to get to the table; and to convince not only everyone abroad, but everyone at home that it is no election year gimmick, I made the additional decision not to seek reelection. 
We have gone part of the way. We are at the table. It took us a month to get there. Some people were not helpful to us in getting there but we are there, thank goodness. The next question is: "What do we do there?" We hope we make progress. We don't know. We have not made much up to date. We can't see the future, but we are going to try. That is why we have been delayed. Thank you very much for your understanding.



283 - The President's News Conference at the LBJ Ranch
May 30, 1968

Only yesterday morning I received a typical report of Australians in combat. A very small unit of the 3d Royal Australian Regiment was blocking an infiltration route toward Saigon 26 miles northeast of the capital. About 1,000 of the enemy, some fresh from North Vietnam, threw themselves against this Australian base

Together, we shall bring a just and honorable peace to Southeast Asia, for that is our objective--and I want to repeat, that is our only objective. 
From last summer to the end of March of this year, we have made a very special effort to move this war to the conference table and to peace talks.
On March 31, in a speech to the Nation,3 I said that we would undertake a major unilateral act of de-escalation. We would lift the bombing from most of the territory and population of North Vietnam, including Hanoi and Haiphong, and we would free our hands so we could concentrate every resource at our command in the search for peace. 
At that time I announced that I would not seek or accept the Presidential nomination. 
I felt that these two steps might--just might--bring Hanoi to the conference table. 
A month went by, but that has now happened, and these talks are being conducted in Paris. 
I cannot report to the American people any substantive progress, nor can I even report that Hanoi has matched our restraint with theirs. 
But if Hanoi will take responsive action, we are ready to go far and fast with them, and with others, to reduce the violence and to build a stable peace in Southeast Asia. 
We have done everything that we know how to do to bring us to this point, and we shall continue to do everything that we know how to do to bring peace to the world. 
THE PRESIDENT. We feel that as a result of our statement back in March, as I repeated earlier, that we had two steps to take: One was to try to get Hanoi to the conference table. That has been done. 
Now how far we are going to get in those conferences is pure speculation. We don't know. We hope that we can have a satisfactory conference that will produce results. 
I don't care to speculate. I do not feel it has produced any substantive results to this date. 
I think we must all continue to try to explore every possible avenue; get down to substantive discussions as soon as possible. 
But as to what the outcome might be, I think I would rather let developments take care of that



288 - Commencement Address at Glassboro State College.
June 4, 1968

In Vietnam, the agonizing difficulties of building peace are made clear every day-just as they are in the Middle East. 
Two months ago, with a major act of deescalation, taken upon our initiative, we brought about the talks in Paris. We have moved at least a step closer, I hope, toward peace in Southeast Asia. But as yet, the other side has had nothing of substance to say to those of us who seek a just peace in Asia. 
First, in response to our concrete proposals, the other side has offered only propaganda. 
Second, their representatives in Paris continue to deny a fact which all the world knows to be true: the massive presence of their North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. 
Finally, the North Vietnamese in Paris will say to us only, "Stop the rest of your bombing"--at a time when North Vietnamese supplies and materiel, more North Vietnamese supplies and materiel than ever before, are flooding into South Vietnam. 
An honorable peace requires some gestures on the other side toward peace. Thus far, we have met with little more than bellicose statements and evasions. 
So--until the men in Hanoi face the real problems of ending the war--we must stand firm and fast. We must stand patiently and hopefully, but with determination, too.



339 - The President's News Conference
June 26, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't think I would want to comment on that now



401 - Statement to the Press at the Close of the Honolulu Conference
July 20, 1968

We discussed the rapidly absorbing infiltrators from the North and how the North Vietnamese are attempting to fill up their units and reequip those units for what we would assume is another major series of attacks. 
We explored all the information we could find to try to ascertain if the enemy had engaged in any effort to match our deescalation, as announced in my March 31 speech. We could not find any solid evidence that the enemy had taken such action or intended to take such action in response to my call



406 - Remarks Before the National Governors' Conference in Cincinnati.
July 23, 1968

When President Thieu and I met last week in Honolulu, we tried to make our position clear. We determined that a cease-fire could be a part of a final peaceful settlement--and that such a cessation will be possible whenever the Government of North Vietnam is prepared earnestly to examine the arrangements required. Effective controls and guarantees would be necessary. 
We agreed that an honorable and secure peace will assure theright of the South Vietnamese people to decide their own affairs without any external interference. It will be in accord with the essential principles of the Geneva accords of 1954 and it will provide full compliance with the Geneva accords of 1962, regarding Laos. 
Now, that is the position of the United States Government. That position is a fair position. That position is a just position. That position is a reasonable position. And I am here tonight to the extent that I can to assure you that position is a firm position of the United States Government as long as I am President. 
So, we do not get peace just because we wish for it. We hope and we always pray for the best, but we must be prepared for what comes.




425 - The President's News Conference
July 31, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Pierpoint,4 I would think the key word in your question is "seem." It does not seem that way to President Thieu. It does not seem that way to Secretary Rusk. As Mr. Christian5 informed you yesterday, it does not seem that way to the President. 
We have no information that it seems that way to North Vietnam. I don't know how else to get at it. You no doubt are aware that they have rejected the San Antonio formula. Since then we have had the March 31st speech6 which made additional proposals and which brought us to the conference table in Paris. Those negotiations are now going on there. 
There has been no change. Nothing Secretary Rusk said yesterday changes our position. The facts are very clear to those who have the information on them.
The number of North Vietnamese soldiers now entering South Vietnam at the end of the Ho Chi Minh trail is now greater than at any other time in this war. We estimated that 30,000 or more North Vietnamese soldiers entered South Vietnam in July. We estimate that even more, Mr. Pierpoint, will come in August. 
I have an unclassified portion of a report today that gives some insight into what our men, fighting for our freedom there, are confronted with. 
"North Vietnam's efforts to expand and diversify its military and logistic capabilities continue unabated." 
These are not assuming things. These are facts. 
"All indicators of traffic movement are at high levels with observed water traffic activity reaching record levels. 
"Flight activity south of the 20th parallel has increased during recent weeks and days. More than 1,200 small watercraft were sighted south of the 19th parallel--four times the weekly average observed since April of 1968. 
"Truck sightings were 25 percent above the weekly average since April 1. Pilot reports of trucks destroyed--40 percent above the average; although rear service traffic has decreased somewhat, the total traffic for the month of July will probably be three times greater than that detected during the month of March." 
To give you an illustration, the week of 15-21 July, we sighted 947 trucks as compared to the weekly average of 717 in April. That gives you some insight into what we can assume and what we know. 
In March, the short-term tons per day traffic was 107 tons. In April it was 215. In May it was 238. In June it was 274. In the first 19 days of July it was 320.
In North Vietnam itself, the movement of troops and war south appears to he down from the all-time high of recent months but is more than twice as high as the 1967 average. 
Now our bombing activity in the very restricted area that we placed upon it on March 31st results in our damaging many of these trucks that are headed south on the infiltration routes. 
That means to all of you that many of the enemy soldiers who are being sent south never have a chance to shoot an American soldier. They don't get there. It means a great deal of ammunition that is carried in those trucks is not available to them to unload on your boys there. It means that many of the bullets and the rockets and the shells being sent south are destroyed and never get fired. 
We have every reason to believe in a cable this morning from our commanders which indicates that the enemy is preparing a massive attack on our forces and those of our allies. 
That is the lesson that we draw from infiltration that is taking place. That is what the captured prisoners tell us that their plans are and their orders are and their instructions are. 
That is what we learned from the documents that we take from those prisoners when they give dates, times, and places. That is the apparent purpose of the huge arms caches that we have discovered and that we are daily destroying. That is what we are told from other forms of various secret intelligence that we have. 
That is the unanimous judgment of your best military leaders in that area. That is the assessment of our allies with whom we have just conferred.
I met with Secretary Bundy 7 last night at some length after he had paid visits to some of our allies. 
There is, therefore, evidence that a massive enemy effort is underway to reequip--the President has this evidence where he can see it--and to retrain for massive attacks upon South Vietnam and particularly on certain specified major cities. 
We were hopeful on March 31st, and we are still hopeful, that the substantial act of restraint against the enemy that we took would be matched by some similar acts of restraint on their part. But the regroupings and rebuilding of thousands of men and deployment grounds a few miles from Saigon, the launching of 100-odd rockets on Danang the other day, just last week, the activity that we encounter and that we observe, makes us discouraged, and we would hope that the enemy offensive which seems imminent could be aborted. 
I cannot ignore this evidence. I cannot order the cessation of further unilateral acts of bombing of the infiltration routes--that are headed toward our men--which are crowded today with men and war materials that the enemy needs. I cannot just step aside and leave our men in the lurch. 
Everyone, I think, is dear [clear] on one thing: We are prepared to halt the bombing when we feel confident that the halt in the bombing will not lead to the loss of heavy American and allied casualties. More than that I cannot do, and more than that you should not have me do
THE PRESIDENT. We continue to hope for the best in the peace talks. So many of our people have encouraged me to believe that if we would take some act of deescalation, we might meet with a response from the other side. I have taken that action. I want to give them all the time necessary to consider it and talk to their allies about it. 
There is always the chance that we will have to act promptly on additional military measures if the enemy puts our men in danger. We are not invading North Vietnam. We have exercised great restraint by removing from the limits of attack 90 percent of their population and almost 80 percent of their area. 
We are hoping that that will be recognized and, in fact, acted upon by them. I cannot anticipate the full extent of all of their actions-military and diplomatic--but if a major offensive does occur, our commanders believe that we are in a position to deal with it and they will be prepared to do so.



452 - Remarks in Detroit at the Annual Convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
August 19, 1968

First, our objective in Southeast Asia is peace, and the essentials of what we mean by peace for a long time have been quite clear. And I am going to repeat them briefly:
--reinstall the demilitarized zone at the 17th parallel, as the Geneva accords of 1954 require, and let the matter of Vietnamese unity be decided by the people of North Vietnam and the people of South Vietnam in the future;
--remove all foreign forces from Laos and reinstall and make fully effective the Geneva accords of 1962 on Laos;
--withdraw the United States forces from South Vietnam under the circumstances described in the Manila communiqu?;
--encourage the people of South Vietnam to exercise their rights of self-determination. It is for them to decide in peace without any coercion of any kind--from anyone--their own political future on a one-man one-vote basis--in a free election-in the spirit of reconciliation reaffirmed by President Thieu at Honolulu. He said there that all can vote in Vietnam, and all can run for office, if they will forsake violence and if they will live by the Constitution. We in the United States agree. 
That is what I mean by an honorable peace. I doubt that any American President will take a substantially different view when he bears the burdens of office, and he has available to him all the information that flows to the Commander in Chief, and he is responsible to our people for all of the consequences of all the alternatives that are open to him. 
Second, the United States took a major initiative toward peace on March 31. We not only made an offer, but we immediately acted. We took a first dramatic step to deescalate the conflict. I immediately ordered our aircraft and our naval vessels to make no attacks on North Vietnam north of the 20th parallel. This excluded from bombing almost 90 percent of the North Vietnamese population and almost 80 percent of the North Vietnamese territory. 
I then, that night, in that televised speech to the Nation had this to say, "I cannot in good conscience stop all bombing so long as to do so would immediately and directly endanger the lives of our men and our allies. Whether a complete bombing halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by events."
Thus far Hanoi's response has been:
--to reject every single suggestion made by ourselves or others to deescalate the conflict;
--to proceed since March 31 with the highest level of infiltration that we have observed during the war in Vietnam, the highest level of southward movement of military supplies, and the highest level of preparations for the third major wave of attack in 1968. 
I do not know whether or when such a new attack will, in fact, take place. It may have already begun. But I can assure you that we are doing everything that's imaginable and in our power to avoid it. 
But I do know that Hanoi has rejected our every offer for prompt deescalation and movement toward peace in favor of their massive military preparations for intensified battle. 
So the next move must be theirs. In affairs there is no more basic lesson than it takes two to make a bargain and to make a peace. We have made a reasonable offer and we have taken a major first step. That offer has not been accepted. This administration does not intend to move further until it has good reason to believe that the other side intends seriously to join us in deescalating the war and moving seriously toward peace. We are willing to take chances for peace but we cannot make foolhardy gestures for which your fighting men will pay the price by giving their lives. 
So tonight I hope you will ask yourselves: Where would the position of this Nation and its allies be if, having taken a major step toward deescalation and peace already, we responded now to their hostility with still another major unilateral step? If you were in Hanoi would you then deescalate and negotiate? Or would you not demand another unilateral step, until finally the whole foundation of freedom for the nations of Southeast Asia was gone beyond repair? 
This President--this administration--will not move down that slippery slope. 
This is a time tonight when Americans have to face certain hard questions and they have to keep certain facts clearly before them. 
First, are we Americans prepared to say to Hanoi that we are ready to have their men by the thousands and their supplies by the tons pour down through the DMZ against our American sons and our allies without obstruction, whether or not Hanoi takes action to deescalate the conflict? Well, that is what would be involved in an immediate halt to all bombing in North Vietnam. 
Second, are we Americans ready to let the Communist forces assemble without any interference around Saigon, Danang, Hue, and other cities and, then and there, deliver their attacks at times and places of their own choice, when it suits their own advantage? Well, that is what would be involved if we should give up our search-and-destroy operations. 
Third, let us all remember that it is a long-established policy of the Government of the United States and the Government of Vietnam that the political future of that country should be decided by free elections based on the principle of one-man one-vote. It is the Communists who have refused to even discuss these elections. It is they who seek a solution by bullet rather than by ballot. 
I can tell you that I believe peace is going to come--that is, if we are steady and it is going to come, if I have anything to do with it, on honorable terms. I cannot tell you precisely when it will come, but I believe that it will come:
--because I believe military victory is beyond the enemy's grasp;
--because the South Vietnamese are gathering political and military strength and confidence day by day; and finally
--because I believe in America. 
However great our anxiety for peace; however great our concern for the war in Vietnam; however great our passionate desire that the killing shall stop, I do not believe that the American people are going to walkaway from this struggle unless they can walkaway from it on honorable terms. 
When we sent our negotiating team off to Paris I told them two things:
--first, put aside all considerations of domestic politics;
--second, work for a genuine peace--the peace which is a vitalinterest of the United States now, and which will serve us well 10 years from now. 
I did not take myself out of personal partisan presidential politics on the night of March 31st in order to permit our pursuit of peace to be colored in the slightest degree by domestic political considerations. I want peace in Vietnam. I want it perhaps more than any single living American individual. But the pursuit of peace in this administration is going to be governed by America's abiding interests as we see them. 
I do have faith, a faith that strengthened me on March 31st, that when the political campaign is all over, and the man takes up the responsibility of the Presidency--whoever he may be--he will take a similar view. 
Right now we are doing all that diplomacy can do to end the war through the talks in Paris. And we shall continue. 
We shall try again and again, every conceivable thing that human ingenuity can produce. I shall do everything I possibly can between now and January, every waking moment, to bring an honorable peace to Southeast Asia. I do hope that it can be possible. But if not, I have faith that the next President-faced with the consequences to his own people, and the consequences to the peace of the world--I have faith that he, too, will stand up and insist on an honorable peace. 
So these are my views on Vietnam. This is my faith. 
But let me add another word about why we came to commit ourselves as a nation in Vietnam and to the security of Southeast Asia. 
This Nation--not this administration, but this Nation--has three times in the past 30 years reacted when one power or another sought by aggression to enlarge its power in Asia: in 1941 on December 7, in 1950, and then in the present conflict. Our responsibility was recognized in 1954 when the SEATO Treaty was adopted by the United States Senate by a vote of 82 to 1. That treaty was accepted by the United States Senate for one simple reason--because in their hearts and their minds, the Members of the Senate knew that this Nation could not and would not ever stand idly by and see all the countries of Southeast Asia placed under the aggressor's heel. They hoped--and they stated in the speeches on that treaty that they hoped--that that treaty and the warning that it represented would deter aggression. 
But the men in Hanoi believed that they commanded a method of aggression that would succeed even in the face of ourcommitment. They have been supported by others who felt that Hanoi's success would drive the United States out of Asia and leave it open for a takeover. 
Well, there is no serious and responsible leader in Asia who does not already know that the struggle now taking place in Vietnam tonight is the hinge on which the fate of Asia will swing--one way or the other-for many years, far into the future. When we insist on an honorable peace in Vietnam, we are insisting on a solution to the struggle which has the promise of permitting the independent nations of Asia to go forward in confidence to build in freedom a life consistent with their own traditions and their own ambitions. We are talking tonight not about 17 million people of South Vietnam, but we are talking about nations which contain hundreds of millions of people. 
There are some among us who appear to be searching for a formula which would get us out of Vietnam and Asia, on any terms, leaving the people of South Vietnam and Laos and Thailand--and all the others--to an uncertain fate. 
Laos, South Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia--pretty soon we could be back to the Philippines--and even back to Honolulu. 
I profoundly believe that this course would be disastrous to the interests of the United States. I believe it would be disastrous to the world--now and in the years to come. 
On the other hand, I am equally confident that if we have the will to see this through in Vietnam to an honorable peace, the way will be open for better times; for a period of relative tranquillity in which the forces of moderation, of national independence, of freedom and regional cooperation will assert themselves in Asia as they are tonight asserting themselves in other parts of the world-permitting the United States not to return to isolation but to work as a partner with a vital region of the world which will more and more assume responsibility for its own destiny. 
Well, that is the ultimate stake in Vietnam--for Americans, for Asians, and for the world. 
That is why three different Presidents have taken and have held the position they have taken. 
And that is why the American people, in my judgment, are going to hold steady and see it through and not cut and run. 
I want the killing in Vietnam to stop--but we cannot stop the killing if North Vietnam insists on sending another 150,000 new aggressors into the South to kill Americans and allies since January the first of this year. 
Remember, it takes two to stop the killing. We are ready now, tonight, to stop the bombing when the other side is prepared not just to see our bombing stop and weapons taken from our men, but the other side is willing to stop their aggression as well. 
We are ready to stop the war now by stopping the fighting when they are ready to stop the war by stopping the aggression. 
We have stopped the bombing already now eight different times. The last time, out of respect to Buddha's birthday. Then, on their own religious birthday--their answer to our stopping the bombing was the Tet offensive when tens of thousands of casualties were suffered by our people. We stopped the bombing again before that, for 37 long days. And what did they stop? Their answer was not to stop aggression, but, General Westmoreland will tell you, they greatly stepped up their aggression while we were stopping the bombing. 
So, my friends, let's not be hoodwinked. Let's not be misled. In short, our people and their people must understand one thing: We are not going to stop the bombing just to give them a chance to step up their bloodbath. We are not going to stop bombing their trucks or bombing their ammunition or bombing their supply lines while they bomb our cities and while they bomb our headquarters and while they mine South Vietnamese territory and they require our American fighting men to bear the brunt of the increased firepower that the Communists would rain on our men if we did not stop every truck and every bit of the ammunition we could. 
On March 31 we stopped 90 percent of the bombing. Have they stopped 90 percent of their infiltration or 80 percent or even 50 percent? No. They didn't stop anything. They increased their infiltration 100 percent. That was their answer to our stopping the bombing. 
We are ready tonight and we are ready tomorrow, either on the battlefield or the conference table in Paris, to put into effect any fair and reasonable cease-fire on both sides--but not just one side. 
We are not going to trade the safety of American fighting men whose voices are not here to be heard in this election campaign for any Trojan horse. They are going to have a voice in this campaign before it is over. 
So tonight, I appeal to all well-intentioned citizens who are demanding that Americans stop the bombing to tell me what they are demanding of Hanoi. I ask each well-intentioned good American to search his conscience when he goes home tonight and ask himself: "Why, oh why do we hear nothing of any demands on Hanoi?" 
You can look at that Marine sergeant and say, "Please sacrifice and give up the best implement you have to stop those trucks, and those handgrenades, and those divisions that are coming toward you. I ask you to give up the best weapon you have and lay it down." 
And he would look at me with those innocent, boyish eyes and say, "Yes, Mr. President, but what are they going to give up?"
And I say, "That has not been mentioned." I am not going to answer him that way. It is one thing when you are seeking responsibility and it is another thing when you have it.
One day I pray--and I pray every night that it will be soon--the men who bear the brunt of battle are going to come back home. And when they do come they are going to ask an accounting of us for the support that we gave them or that we denied them in the hour of greatest need when we sent them away to protect us and to defend us. 
I hope and I pray that we are not going to be found wanting in that judgment. 
So long as I am the American Commander in Chief we are not going to be found wanting. 
You men who grace this banquet hall tonight did your job, in your time, and you did it in faraway places, in great fear--because no man ever got shot at who wasn't frightened. I know. But you brought home your Nation's flag in honor--and you brought it home unstained. And they are going to do the same in Vietnam. 
And we all shall know that those who do not come back--your brothers in arms--will not have died in vain.




467 - The President's News Conference
September 6, 1968

This is not a question of a Democrat or a Republican meeting over there. It is a question of the United States of America and North Vietnam. So far as I am aware, no one has raised any partisan question about those talks. I don't even know what party Mr. Vance 20 and others belong to



472 - Remarks in New Orleans Before the 50th Annual National Convention of the American Legion.
September 10, 1968

When the first American soldiers went into South Vietnam in the early 1960's, it was because this Nation saw that if the Communist aggression there succeeded, the entire region of Southeast Asia would be in mortal danger, and the threat of world war would be more ominous. 
We have heard many voices raised in opposition to this stand. Indeed, I have sought some of these voices out. For, as your President, I assure you in these long days and nights for more than 5 years now, we have searched every avenue of thought and opinion on this issue that so troubles all of our people today. 
But after investigating carefully every possible course of action, I always come back to that warning of President Harry S. Truman about how unchallenged aggression could lead to another world war. 
Inevitably, I always come back to that judgment of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, who said that if South Vietnam were captured by the Communists, "The freedom of 12 million people would be lost immediately, and that of 150 million others in adjacent lands would be seriously endangered. The loss of South Vietnam," President Eisenhower said, "would set in motion a crumbling process that could, as it progressed, have grave consequences for us and for freedom." 
I always come back to these words, not of President Truman or President Eisenhower, but the late, beloved John Fitzgerald Kennedy, when he said, "for us to withdraw from that effort [in Vietnam] would mean a collapse not only of South Vietnam, but Southeast Asia. So we are going to stay there." 
The judgments of these three former Presidents, as mine has been, were formed in positions of the greatest responsibility. After seeing, hearing, reading, and studying all the evidence, their judgments were formed and were unshakable. The American Constitution obliges the President to make his judgment, as Commander in Chief, according to what he believes is in the best interest of all the American people. 
And I have believed--as these three Presidents believed who went before me--that a Communist military takeover in South Vietnam would lead to developments that could imperil the security of the American people for generations to come. 
I know very well the cost of ourcommitment. Every day and every night I mourn every man who has been lost or who has been wounded. 
But a President, a President worthy of this title, if he is true to his trust, must think not only in terms of those who have fallen. He must think in terms of the casualties that might have been--or the dead who might be. 
If we had not drawn the line against aggression in Vietnam, in keeping with the treaty that we signed, the SEATO obligations, and if the erosion of freedom had begun that President Eisenhower told you about when I quoted him a moment ago, some American President--some President-some day would have to draw the line somewhere else. And I ask you, at how much greater cost? How many millions of young Americans would be lost in the larger war that would surely and inevitably come?
Well, these are the sobering questions that no President or no Commander in Chief can escape. 
From the very first, our objective in Vietnam has been to prevent the aggressor from taking that land by force. 
We Americans have sought no advantage--except the advantage of peace. We have tried to fight a limited war--not to destroy an enemy, not to win a military victory, but to try in every way we knew how, as best we could, to protect our friends, remain true to our obligations, and win a peace in that part of the world. 
We believed that to be very much in America's national interest then, and we believe it to be in America's national interest now. 
On the night of March 31st, in a television address to this Nation, we launched a major new effort for peace. That was the latest of many. 
We had already had eight bombing pauses. But on that night we announced that we would withdraw 90 percent of the population of Vietnam, almost 80 percent of the territory, from the area that our men were permitted to bomb. 
As the result of that effort, our negotiating team would be willing to meet with the representatives of North Vietnam. The enemy suggested that we meet in Cambodia, and then he suggested that we meet in Poland. Against great odds and against the advice of some of our more eager people, we finally agreed not to meet in either of those places, but to meet in Paris. The wisdom of that decision, I think, is pretty clear to almost any of you today. 
We continue now to hope that something productive is going to come out of those meetings. 
All we have heard so far is a demand that we do something else without their having responded to our first bombing restrictions. 
Now let me make it as clear as I possibly can why we are still bombing and will continue to bomb the panhandle of North Vietnam--why reestablishing the DMZ, I think, is so critical to peace in Vietnam. 
In the area just below the DMZ, we and our allies have some four divisions of men and the necessary people to support them, involving more than 60,000 Americans and one division of South Vietnamese. Just behind them in the rest of I Corps are an additional 164,000 American and allied fighting men. 
Those close to the DMZ are subjected daily to artillery fire and the direct movement of enemy forces across that DMZ against them. All those men in I Corps are constantly subjected to a massive flow of supplies and infiltrators and rocket fire, through the panhandle to the northern part of the battlefield. 
Now, these are just hard, inescapable facts that a Commander in Chief must face up to and confront.
So what are our choices? 
First, we could invade North Vietnam with our men. We could overrun their military positions. We could throttle the supply routes in North Vietnam itself. This we do not wish to do, although it should be clear that the North Vietnamese do wish to invade South Vietnam, and they are doing so--although they don't want to admit it. 
Second, we could withdraw our forces. We could retreat and surrender on the installment plan, as some have suggested, by taking our men from below the DMZ, and turn over the I Corps area, that part of South Vietnam, turn it over to the North Vietnamese. This, I assure you, we shall not do. 
If we cannot take our men in, and we are not going to take our men out, it appears to me, third, that the best thing we can do is to bring our planes to bear in the panhandle across the line against the artillery, the trucks, and the rocket launchers that are being fired on our men, and to bring it to bear against the enemy trucks, the enemy troops, and the enemy supplies that are coming through. Because every secondary explosion--and there were thousands there last month-means that that powder and that steel doesn't have to be brought back from South Vietnam by some American soldier in his body, if it is stopped in North Vietnam. 
We are today exacting a very substantial price from the enemy. It requires patience of all of us. But we are limiting his capacity to bring weight against our forces and our allies. There is not the slightest doubt that if we should stop the bombing in the panhandle, the military capacity of the enemy to hurt our forces would greatly increase, and our casualties would skyrocket. 
Just a few days ago, I went to the field with a cable and asked the commander of our troops in South Vietnam, one of the ablest commanders ever to wear a uniform, General Abrams, to give me his viewpoint on what would happen if I should order him to carry out the suggestion that had been made by some of our enemies abroad and some of our friends at home to stop the bombing. 
His reply was simply this: If you should require me to stop the bombing of North Vietnam, you would permit the enemy to increase his capability several fold in 10 days, and if he did, I would be forced to withdraw our men from that area because they could no longer stand their ground. 
Now, I am not going to issue any order like that. 
General Abrams--and not a single field commander we have has made that recommendation to me. I am not a prophet or a speculator, but I do prophesy that some of these men who recommend it now would not do so if they were there on the DMZ, and could see there what our men face every day and face every night. 
Therefore, the Commander in Chief has insisted that the bombing will not stop until we are confident that it will not lead to an increase in American casualties. That is why we have placed such emphasis on reestablishing the DMZ. 
We yearn for the day when the violence subsides. We yearn for the day when our men can come home. No man can predict when that day will come, because we are there to bring an honorable, stable peace to Southeast Asia, and no less will justify the sacrifices that our men have died for




522 - Remarks of Welcome at the White House to Prime Minister Holyoake of New Zealand.
October 9, 1968

In the latter half of 1964, the war in South Vietnam began to change character as North Vietnamese regular units were introduced into the South. In early 1965 it became clear that South Vietnamese boys or Asian boys could not alone hold the line in this Asian conflagration. And so, the United States and five Asian nations--including New Zealand--sent troops and materials to respond jointly to Hanoi's enlarged aggression. 
Aggression was checked--but all restraint was used to try to limit the fighting--and every reasonable precaution was taken to try to contain the conflict



529 - Remarks Broadcast on a Program Sponsored by the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union.
October 10, 1968

I deeply regret that we have thus far been unable to bring the Vietnam conflict to an end--to achieve an honorable settlement of a war that we did not invite, but from which we could not run. 
On March 31st, I did all that I knew to do when I announced the first step in what I hoped would be a mutual deescalation of the hostilities. As you know, talks followed in Paris. I have high hopes that from the conference table in Paris will ultimately come an agreement to end the war. As you, of course, can imagine, I hope it will come soon--within the next few months. But if it does not come then--if North Vietnam maintains an intransigent policy that does not meet the minimal requirements of fairness, and that would jeopardize the lives of our men and the people of South Vietnam-I am determined that the next administration will find America, South Vietnam, and our allies in a strong position on the battlefield






541 - Remarks Upon Presenting the Presidential Unit Citation to the 5th Marine Regiment (Reinforced), 1st Marine Division (Reinforced)
October 17, 1968

Units of the Regiment first went ashore in South Vietnam as special landing forces in March and April of 1966, and since then have operated in all parts of the I Corps, have taken part in numerous major operations and have defeated the enemy in every encounter. As a direct result of its actions in the early summer of 1967, the 2d North Vietnamese Army Division was rendered completely ineffective as a fighting force for many months



557 - The President's News Conference
October 24, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. I think that on Vietnam it is better that we just stay with the statement that we have made. We have communications with the North Vietnamese from time to time. And we have no problem exchanging viewpoints at this stage. 
The decision we made March 31st resulted in their agreement first to meet in Cambodia and later in Poland, and finally we agreed on Paris. I am very glad that I made that decision March 31st.10 
One of our problems is not how we exchange viewpoints. I have told you generally that I don't think it is good policy to try to handle all diplomacy in public. The negotiators have to present their views and we have to give them our instructions. A great many times we would negate our policy if you got the instructions before the negotiators did. 
So we are working very hard and very diligently and very earnestly. The only thing I can say to you is that I think the decision of March 31st was indicated, was justified, and I am more pleased by it every hour that goes by.




564 - Remarks Upon Arrival at the Airport, Huntington, West Virginia.
October 26, 1968

Of course uneasiness goes with all of us today because there are more than a half million of our men in Vietnam whom we would like to see back home. We went there to save this struggling country from being enveloped in communism. We went there in accordance with the commitment of the United States Government given by three Presidents. And we are going to stay there until we can fulfill that commitment and come home with peace, with honor. 
We are negotiating at the table today in Paris. We are doing everything that we know how to do to try to find areas of agreement, to try to find means of deescalating the war, of trying to find a manner in which we could, with honor, withdraw our troops and the North Vietnamese would withdraw theirs, and we would leave the South Vietnamese future up to the people of South Vietnam. 
But until we can find that answer, we cannot run away from our obligation. I don't believe the people of America or the people of West Virginia would have us do it



572 - The President's Address to the Nation Upon Announcing His Decision To Halt the Bombing of North Vietnam
October 31, 1968

We have been engaged in discussions with the North Vietnamese in Paris since last May. The discussions began after I announced on the evening of March 31st in a television speech to the Nation that the United States-in an effort to get talks started on a settlement of the Vietnam war--had stopped the bombing of North Vietnam in the area where 90 percent of the people live. 
When our representatives--Ambassador Harriman and Ambassador Vance--were sent to Paris, they were instructed to insist throughout the discussions that the legitimate elected Government of South Vietnam must take its place in any serious negotiations affecting the future of South Vietnam. 
Therefore, our Ambassadors Harriman and Vance made it abundantly clear to the representatives of North Vietnam in the beginning that--as I had indicated on the evening of March 31st--we would stop the bombing of North Vietnamese territory entirely when that would lead to prompt and productive talks, meaning by that talks in which the Government of Vietnam was free to participate. 
Our ambassadors also stressed that we could not stop the bombing so long as by doing so we would endanger the lives and the safety of our troops. 
For a good many weeks, there was no movement in the talks at all. The talks appeared to really be deadlocked. 
Then a few weeks ago, they entered a new and a very much more hopeful phase. 
As we moved ahead, I conducted a series of very intensive discussions with our allies, and with the senior military and diplomatic officers of the United States Government, on the prospects for peace. The President also briefed our congressional leaders and all of the presidential candidates. 
Last Sunday evening, and throughout Monday, we began to get confirmation of the essential understanding that we had been seeking with the North Vietnamese on the critical issues between us for some time. I spent most of all day Tuesday reviewing every single detail of this matter with our field commander, General Abrams, whom I had ordered home, and who arrived here at the White House at 2:30 in the morning and went into immediate conference with the President and the appropriate members of his Cabinet. We received General Abrams' judgment and we heard his recommendations at some length. 
Now, as a result of all of these developments, I have now ordered that all air, naval, and artillery bombardment of North Vietnam cease as of 8 a.m., Washington time, Friday morning. 
I have reached this decision on the basis of the developments in the Paris talks. 
And I have reached it in the belief that this action can lead to progress toward a peaceful settlement of the Vietnamese war. 
This decision very closely conforms to the statements that I have made in the past concerning a bombing cessation. 
It was on August 19th that the President said: "This administration does not intend to move further until it has good reason to believe that the other side intends seriously"--seriously--"to join us in deescalating the war and moving seriously toward peace." 
And then again on September 10th, I said: "The bombing will not stop until we are confident that it will not lead to an increase in American casualties." 
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, all military men, have assured me--and General Abrams very firmly asserted to me on Tuesday in that early, 2:30 a.m. meeting--that in their military judgment this action should be taken now, and this action would not result in any increase in American casualties. 
A regular session of the Paris talks is going to take place next Wednesday, November 6th, at which the representatives of the Government of South Vietnam are free to participate. We are informed by the representatives of the Hanoi Government that the representatives of the National Liberation Front will also be present. I emphasize that their attendance in no way involves recognition of the National Liberation Front in any form. Yet, it conforms to the statements that we have made many times over the years that the NLF would have no difficulty making its views known. 
But what we now expect--what we have a right to expect--are prompt, productive, serious, and intensive negotiations in an atmosphere that is conducive to progress. 
We have reached the stage where productive talks can begin. We have made clear to the other side that such talks cannot continue if they take military advantage of them. We cannot have productive talks in an atmosphere where the cities are being shelled and where the demilitarized zone is being abused. 
I think I should caution you, my fellow Americans, that arrangements of this kind are never foolproof. For that matter, even formal treaties are never foolproof, as we have learned from our experience. 
But in the light of the progress that has been made in recent weeks, and after carefully considering and weighing the unanimous military and diplomatic advice and judgment rendered to the Commander in Chief, I have finally decided to take this step now and to really determine the good faith of those who have assured us that progress will result when bombing ceases and to try to ascertain if an early peace is possible. The overriding consideration that governs us at this hour is the chance and the opportunity that we might have to save human lives, save human lives on both sides of the conflict. Therefore, I have concluded that we should see if they are acting in good faith. 
We could be misled--and we are prepared for such a contingency. We pray God it does not occur. 
But it should be clear to all of us that the new phase of negotiations which opens on November 6th does not--repeat, does not-mean that a stable peace has yet come to Southeast Asia. There may well be very hard fighting ahead. Certainly, there is going to be some very hard negotiating, because many difficult and critically important issues are still facing these negotiators. But I hope and I believe that with good will we can solve them. We know that negotiations can move swiftly if the common intent of the negotiators is peace in the world.
The world should know that the American people bitterly remember the long, agonizing Korean negotiations of 1951 through 1953--and that our people will just notaccept deliberate delay and prolonged procrastination again. 
Well then, how has it come about that now, on November 1st, we have agreed to stop the bombardment of North Vietnam? 
I would have given all I possess if the conditions had permitted me to stop it months ago; if there had just been any movement in the Paris talks that would have justified me in saying to you, "Now it can be safely stopped." 
But I, the President of the United States, do not control the timing of the events in Hanoi. The decisions in Hanoi really determine when and whether it would be possible for us to stop the bombing. 
We could not retract our insistence on the participation of the Government of South Vietnam in serious talks affecting the future of their people--the people of South Vietnam. For though we have allied with South Vietnam for many years in this struggle, we have never assumed and we shall never demand the role of dictating the future of the people of South Vietnam. The very principle for which we are engaged in South Vietnam--the principle of self-determination-requires that the South Vietnamese people themselves be permitted to freely speak for themselves at the Paris talks and that the South Vietnamese delegation play a leading role in accordance with our agreement with President Thieu at Honolulu. 
It was made just as clear to North Vietnam that a total bombing halt must not risk the lives of our men. 
When I spoke last March 31st, I said that evening: "Whether a complete bombing halt becomes possible in the future will be determined by events." 
Well, I cannot tell you tonight specifically in all detail why there has been progress in Paris. But I can tell you that a series of hopeful events has occurred in South Vietnam:
--The Government of South Vietnam has grown steadily stronger.
--South Vietnam's Armed Forces have been substantially increased to the point where a million men are tonight under arms, and the effectiveness of these men has steadily improved.
--The superb performance of our own men, under the brilliant leadership of General Westmoreland and General Abrams, has produced truly remarkable results. 
Now, perhaps some or all of these factors played a part in bringing about progress in the talks. And when at last progress did come, I believe that my responsibilities to the brave men--our men--who bear the burden of battle in South Vietnam tonight, and my duty to seek an honorable settlement of the war, required me to recognize and required me to act without delay. I have acted tonight. 
There have been many long days of waiting for new steps toward peace--days that began in hope, only to end at night in disappointment. Constancy to our national purpose-which is to seek the basis for a durable peace in Southeast Asia--has sustained me in all of these hours when there seemed to be no progress whatever in these talks. 
But now that progress has come, I know that your prayers are joined with mine and with those of all humanity, that the action I announce tonight will be a major step toward a firm and an honorable peace in Southeast Asia. It can be. 
So, what is required of us in these new circumstances is exactly that steady determination and patience which has brought us to this more hopeful prospect. 
What is required of us is a courage and a steadfastness, and a perseverance here at home, that will match that of our men who fight for us tonight in Vietnam. 
So, I ask you not only for your prayers but for the courageous and understanding support that Americans always give their President and their leader in an hour of trial. With that understanding, and with that support, we shall not fail. 



646 - The President's News Conference
December 27, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. I can't make any prediction of that now



676 - Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union
January 14, 1969

regret more than any of you know that it has not been possible to restore peace to South Vietnam. 
The prospects, I think, for peace are better today than at any time since North Vietnam began its invasion with its regular forces more than 4 years ago. 
The free nations of Asia know what they were not sure of at that time: that America cares about their freedom, and it also cares about America's own vitalinterests in Asia and throughout the Pacific. 
The North Vietnamese know that they cannot achieve their aggressive purposes by force. There may be hard fighting before a settlement is reached; but, I can assure you, it will yield no victory to the Communist cause



34 - The President's News Conference
February 6, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Smith [Merriman Smith, United Press International], I do not see any possibility of that kind of conversation at this time. I would notrule it out at some later time, if Ambassador Lodge and others who have responsibility for negotiation thought it were wise. 
With Ambassador Lodge and his colleagues, I hope to get a complete report on the progress of the negotiations and also any recommendations that he or they may have with regard to new initiatives that we might take to make more progress than we have made. 
I think we have made a good start in Paris, incidentally. I believe that we can now move forward to some substantive achievements.



98 - The President's News Conference
March 4, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Well, in speaking of the Communist offensive, I think it is important first to analyze what it is and what its purposes are, compare it with the offensive last year, and then see what that offensive means in terms of the violation of the understanding last October 31 or prior to October 31 at the time of the bombing halt. 
When we look at the offensive, we find that in terms of the frequency of attacks it is approximately the same as the offensive of last year. In terms of intensity of attacks, it is less than that of last year. As far as the targets are concerned, it is primarily directed toward military targets, but there are also some very significant civilian targets. Now, as far as the purposes are concerned, we can only guess; but three have been suggested: that it might be directed against the Government of South Vietnam to break its morale and its back; that it might be directed against public opinion in the United States to put more pressure on the administration to move more in the direction of North Vietnam's position at the Paris peace talks; or that it might be directed toward a military victory of sorts, if a military victory of sorts could be accomplished in South Vietnam by the North Vietnamese against our forces there. 
Now, this offensive has failed in all three of these areas. It has failed to achieve any significant military breakthrough. It has failed to break the back of the Government of South Vietnam. Far from that, as a matter of fact, in terms of the pacification program, 700,000 were displaced by the Tet offensive last year, and only 25,000 have been displaced by this one. As far as this offensive affecting the United States and its negotiating position in Paris, it could have exactly the opposite effect. 
I think that, therefore, we must now analyze the offensive in terms of the understanding of October 31. Now, that understanding was to the effect that continued shelling of, or attacks on, the cities, the major cities of South Vietnam, would be inconsistent with talks toward peace which would be productive in Paris. 
Now, we are examining this particular offensive, examining it very carefully, to see whether its magnitude is in violation of that understanding. Technically, it could be said that it is in violation. Whether we reach the conclusion that the violation is so significant that it requires action on our part is a decision we will be reaching very soon if those attacks continue at their present magnitude. 
As you know, Secretary Laird is going to South Vietnam tomorrow, and I have asked him to look into the situation and to give me a report after he has been there. 
One other factor should be mentioned: I do not want to discount by this analysis the seriousness of these attacks, because the American casualty rate, I note, has doubled during the period of these attacks. Therefore, it is necessary for the American President, in analyzing the attacks, to think not only of the understanding with regard to the attacks on the cities, but also of his obligation to defend American fighting men in Vietnam. 
We have not moved in a precipitate fashion, but the fact that we have shown patience and forbearance should not be considered as a sign of weakness. We will not tolerate a continuation of a violation of an understanding. But more than that, we will not tolerate attacks which result in heavier casualties to our men at a time that we are honestly trying to seek peace at the conference table in Paris. An appropriate response to these attacks will be made if they continue
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Wilson [Richard L. Wilson, Des Moines Register and Tribune], that question is one that I have given thought to but it is one which I think should not be answered in this forum. 
I believe that it is far more effective in international policy to use deeds, rather than words threatening deeds, in order to accomplish objectives. 
I will only say in answer to that question that the United States has a number of options that we could exercise to respond. We have several contingency plans that can be put into effect. 
I am considering all of those plans. We shall use whatever plan we consider is appropriate to the action on the other side. I will not indicate in advance, and I am not going to indicate publicly, and I am not going to threaten--I don't think that would be helpful-that we are going to start bombing the North or anything else. 
I will only indicate that we will not tolerate a continuation of this kind of attack without some response that will be appropriate
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News], as you know, the Soviet Union is in a very delicate and sensitive position as far as Vietnam is concerned. I do not divulge any confidences from the Soviet Ambassador in indicating that that is the case. You ladies and gentlemen have written it and you are correct, because here you have Communist China aiding North Vietnam; you also have the Soviet Union aiding Noah Vietnam--each vying for power in the Communist world. And, therefore, what the Soviet Union does in the Vietnamese conflict is a very difficult decision for them as related to that objective-the objective of leadership of the Communist world

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we have had discussions, as I have already indicated, with the Soviet Ambassador. I do not think it would be appropriate, however, to disclose our discussions with him any more than it is appropriate to disclose our discussions with others that we have dealt with that are supposed to be confidential in nature. I am sure that the Soviet Union is keenly aware of the fact that we would be greatly gratified by anything that they could do that could pull some of the support away from the Government of North Vietnam. You could probably just guess as to what our conversations were, but I will not indicate what they were

THE PRESIDENT. What I think Vice President Ky was referring to was new approaches not so much in the military field, but in terms of the diplomatic initiative. In our discussions with him, and also in our discussions with the American negotiating team, we discussed the approaches that might be made that would break the deadlock. 
Now, with regard to the Paris negotiations, I think we can now say that we have neared the end of phase one, in which both parties have set out their positions in public forums. Those positions having been set out, we now come to phase two, in which we will have hard bargaining on the major points of difference. Our negotiating team has been given some instructions and will be given more with regard to a variety of approaches, approaches which, in some instances, will also be taken by the Government of South Vietnam. 
One point, incidentally, that I was very encouraged by was that Vice President Ky, speaking for his delegation, was most cooperative in indicating his desire to attempt to find and explore new approaches at the conference table, rather than simply resign ourselves to a military decision.
On the one hand, in Vietnam, they are heating up the war. They furnish 80 percent to 85 percent of the sophisticated military equipment for the North Vietnamese forces. Without that assistance, North Vietnam would not have the capability to wage the major war they are against the United States




108 - The President's News Conference
March 14, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. Our measured response has not had the effect of discouraging the progress, and it is very limited progress, toward talks in Paris. That is the negative side in answering your question. 
As to whether or not a different response would either discourage those talks or might have the effect of even encouraging. them is the decision that we now have to make. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Bailey [Charles W. Bailey 2d, Minneapolis Star and Tribune], in view of the current offensive on the part of the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong, there is no prospect for a reduction of American forces in the foreseeable future. 
When we are able to reduce forces as a result of a combination of circumstances-the ability of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves in areas where we now are defending them, the progress of the talks in Paris, or the level of enemy activity-when that occurs, I will make an announcement. But at this time there is no foreseeable prospect in that field



129 - Remarks at the Convention of the National Association of Broadcasters.
March 25, 1969

Now let me be quite candid. As far as any negotiated peace is concerned, it will come from private rather than public talks because where both sides--and I am referring now particularly to the North Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese-have a problem of prestige and a problem of face among many others involved, that kind of negotiation cannot take place in a goldfish bowl with communiqu?s every day, because there the tendency always is to speak to their people at home, but more than that to the people of the world, and to simply repeat the old rhetoric. 
Most of the progress that has been made today in bringing about talks in a public forum has come from private talks. 
So, I can tell you that it is our conviction and our belief that it is through private talks with the North Vietnamese and others involved that real progress toward peace will be made



195 - Address to the Nation on Vietnam.
May 14, 1969

I have asked for this television time tonight to report to you on our most difficult and urgent problem--the war in Vietnam. 
Since I took office 4 months ago, nothing has taken so much of my time and energy as the search for a way to bring lasting peace to Vietnam. I know that some believe that I should have ended the war immediately after the inauguration by simply ordering our forces home from Vietnam. 
This would have been the easy thing to do. It might have been a popular thing to do. But I would have betrayed my solemn responsibility as President of the United States if I had done so. 
I want to end this war. The American people want to end this war. The people of South Vietnam want to end this war. But we want to end it permanently so that the younger brothers of our soldiers in Vietnam will not have to fight in the future in another Vietnam someplace else in the world. 
The fact that there is no easy way to end the war does not mean that we have no choice but to let the war drag on with no end in sight. 
For 4 years American boys have been fighting and dying in Vietnam. For 12 months our negotiators have been talking with the other side in Paris. And yet the fighting goes on. The destruction continues. Brave men still die. 
The time has come for some new initiatives. Repeating the old formulas and the tired rhetoric of the past is not enough. When Americans are risking their lives in war, it is the responsibility of their leaders to take some risks for peace. 
I would like to report to you tonight on some of the things we have been doing in the past 4 months to bring true peace, and then I would like to make some concrete proposals to speed that day. 
Our first step began before inauguration. This was to launch an intensive review of every aspect of the Nation's Vietnam policy. We accepted nothing on faith, we challenged every assumption and every statistic. We made a systematic, serious examination of all the alternatives open to us. We carefully considered recommendations offered both by critics and supporters of past policies. 
From the review, it became clear at once that the new administration faced a set of immediate operational problems: 
--The other side was preparing for a new offensive. 
--There was a wide gulf of distrust between Washington and Saigon. 
--In 8 months of talks in Paris, there had been nonegotiations directly concerned with a final settlement. 
Therefore, we moved on several fronts at once. 
We frustrated the attack which was launched in late February. As a result, the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong failed to achieve their military objectives. 
In weighing alternate courses, we have had to recognize that the situation as it exists today is far different from what it was 2 years ago or 4 years ago or 10 years ago. 
One difference is that we no longer have the choice of not intervening. We have crossed that bridge. There are now more than a half million American troops in Vietnam and 35,000 Americans have lost their lives. 
We can have honest debate about whether we should have entered the war in Vietnam. We can have honest debate about how the war has been conducted. But the urgent question today is what to do now that we are there. 
Against that background, let me discuss first, what we have rejected, and second, what we are prepared to accept. 
We have ruledout attempting to impose a purely military solution on the battlefield. 
We have also ruledout either a one-sided withdrawal from Vietnam, or the acceptance in Paris of terms that would amount to a disguised American defeat. 
When we assumed the burden of helping defend South Vietnam, millions of South Vietnamese men, women, and children placed their trust in us. To abandon them now would risk a massacre that would shock and dismay everyone in the world who values human life. 
Abandoning the South Vietnamese people, however, would jeopardize more than lives in South Vietnam. It would threaten our long-term hopes for peace in the world. A great nation cannot renege on its pledges. A great nation must be worthy of trust. 
When it comes to maintaining peace, "prestige" is not an empty word. I am not speaking of false pride or bravado--they should have no place in our policies. I speak rather of the respect that one nation has for another's integrity in defending its principles and meeting its obligations. 
If we simply abandoned our effort in Vietnam, the cause of peace might not survive the damage that would be done to other nations' confidence in our reliability. 
Another reason for not withdrawing unilaterally stems from debates within the Communist world between those who argue for a policy of confrontation with the United States, and those who argue against it. 
If Hanoi were to succeed in taking over South Vietnam by force--even after the power of the United States had been engaged--it would greatly strengthen those leaders who scorn negotiation, who advocate aggression, who minimize the risks of confrontation with the United States. It would bring peace now but it would enormously increase the danger of a bigger war later. 
If we are to move successfully from an era of confrontation to an era of negotiation, then we have to demonstrate--at the point at which confrontation is being tested--that confrontation with the United States is costly and unrewarding. 
Almost without exception, the leaders of non-Communist Asia have told me that they would consider a one-sided American withdrawal from Vietnam to be a threat to the security of their own nations. 
In determining what choices would be acceptable, we have to understand our essential objective in Vietnam: What we want is very little, but very fundamental. We seek the opportunity for the South Vietnamese people to determine their own political future without outside interference. 
Let me put it plainly: What the United States wants for South Vietnam is not the important thing. What North Vietnam wants for South Vietnam is not the important thing. What is important is what the people of South Vietnam want for South Vietnam. 
The United States has suffered over a million casualties in four wars in this century. Whatever faults we may have as a nation, we have asked nothing for ourselves in return for those sacrifices. We have been generous toward those whom we have fought. We have helped our former foes as well as our friends in the task of reconstruction. We are proud of this record, and we bring the same attitude in our search for a settlement in Vietnam. 
In this spirit, let me be explicit about several points: 
--We seek no bases in Vietnam. 
--We seek no military ties. 
--We are willing to agree to neutrality for South Vietnam if that is what the South Vietnamese people freely choose. 
--We believe there should be an opportunity for full participation in the political life of South Vietnam by all political elements that are prepared to do so without the use of force or intimidation. 
--We are prepared to accept any government in South Vietnam that results from the free choice of the South Vietnamese people themselves. 
--We have no intention of imposing any form of government upon the people of South Vietnam, nor will we be a party to such coercion. 
--We have no objection to reunification, if that turns out to be what the people of South Vietnam and the people of North Vietnam want; we ask only that the decision reflect the free choice of the people concerned. 
At this point, I would like to add a personal word based on many visits to South Vietnam over the past 5 years. This is the most difficult war in America's history, fought against a ruthless enemy. I am proud of our men who have carried the terrible burden of this war with dignity and courage, despite the division and opposition to the war in the United States. History will record that never have America's fighting men fought more bravely for more unselfish goals than our men in Vietnam. It is our responsibility to see that they have not fought in vain. 
In pursuing our limited objective, we insist on no rigid diplomatic formula. Peace could be achieved by a formal negotiated settlement. Peace could be achieved by an informal understanding, provided that the understanding is clear, and that there were adequate assurances that it would be observed. Peace on paper is not as important as peace in fact. 
And so this brings us to the matter of negotiations. 
We must recognize that peace in Vietnam cannot be achieved overnight. A war that has raged for many years will require detailed negotiations and cannot be settled by a single stroke. 
What kind of a settlement will permit the South Vietnamese people to determine freely their own political future? Such a settlement will require the withdrawal of all non-South Vietnamese forces, including our own, from South Vietnam, and procedures for political choice that give each significant group in South Vietnam a real opportunity to participate in the political life of the nation. 
To implement these principles, I reaffirm now our willingness to withdraw our forces on a specified timetable. We ask only that North Vietnam withdraw its forces from South Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos into North Vietnam, also in accordance with a timetable. 
We include Cambodia and Laos to ensure that these countries would not be used as bases for a renewed war. 
Our offer provides for a simultaneous start on withdrawal by both sides, for agreement on a mutually acceptable timetable, and for the withdrawal to be accomplished quickly. 
The North Vietnamese delegates have been saying in Paris that political issues should be discussed along with military issues, and that there must be a political settlement in the South. We do not dispute this, but the military withdrawal involves outside forces, and can, therefore, be properly negotiated by North Vietnam and the United States, with the concurrence of its allies. 
The political settlement is an internal matter which ought to be decided among the South Vietnamese themselves, and not imposed by outsiders. However, if our presence at these political negotiations would be helpful, and if the South Vietnamese concerned agreed, we would be willing to participate, along with the representatives of Hanoi, if that also were desired. 
Recent statements by President Thieu have gone far toward opening the way to a political settlement. He has publicly declared his Government's willingness to discuss a political solution with the National Liberation Front, and has offered free elections. This was a dramatic step forward, a reasonable offer that could lead to a settlement. The South Vietnamese Government has offered to talk without preconditions. I believe the other side should also be willing to talk without preconditions. 
The South Vietnamese Government recognizes, as we do, that a settlement must permit all persons and groups that are prepared to renounce the use of force to participate freely in the political life of South Vietnam. To be effective, such a settlement would require two things: first, a process that would allow the South Vietnamese people to express their choice, and, second, a guarantee that this process would be a fair one. 
We do not insist on a particular form of guarantee. The important thing is that the guarantees should have the confidence of the South Vietnamese people, and that they should be broad enough and strong enough to protect the interests of all major South Vietnamese groups. 
This, then, is the outline of the settlement that we seek to negotiate in Paris. Its basic terms are very simple: mutual withdrawal of non-South Vietnamese forces from South Vietnam and free choice for the people of South Vietnam. I believe that the long-term interests of peace require that we insist on no less, and that the realities of the situation require that we seek no more. 
And now, to make very concrete what I have said, I propose the following specific measures which seem to me consistent with the principles of all parties. These proposals are made on the basis of full consultation with President Thieu. 
--As soon as agreement can be reached, all non-South Vietnamese forces would begin withdrawals from South Vietnam. 
--Over a period of 12 months, by agreed-upon stages, the major portions of all U.S., allied, and other non-South Vietnamese forces would be withdrawn. At the end of this 12-month period, the remaining U.S., allied, and other non-South Vietnamese forces would move into designated base areas and would not engage in combat operations. 
--The remaining U.S. and allied forces would complete their withdrawals as the remaining North Vietnamese forces were withdrawn and returned to North Vietnam. 
--An international supervisory body, acceptable to both sides, would be created for the purpose of verifying withdrawals, and for any other purposes agreed upon between the two sides. 
--This international body would begin operating in accordance with an agreed timetable and would participate in arranging supervised cease-fires in Vietnam. 
--As soon as possible after the international body was functioning, elections would be held under agreed procedures and under the supervision of the international body. 
--Arrangements would be made for the release of prisoners of war on both sides at the earliest possible time. 
--All parties would agree to observe the Geneva Accords of 1954 regarding South Vietnam and Cambodia, and the Laos Accords of 1962. 
I believe this proposal for peace is realistic, and takes account of the legitimate interests of all concerned. It is consistent with President Thieu's six points. It can accommodate the various programs put forth by the other side. We and the Government of South Vietnam are prepared to discuss the details with the other side. 
Secretary Rogers is now in Saigon and he will be discussing with President Thieu how, together, we may put forward these proposed measures most usefully in Paris. He will, as well, be consulting with our other Asian allies on these measures while on his Asian trip. However, I would stress that these proposals are not offered on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. We are quite willing to consider other approaches consistent with our principles. 
We are willing to talk about anybody's program--Hanoi's 4 points, the NLF's [National Liberation Front] 10 points-provided it can be made consistent with the very few basic principles I have set forth here tonight. 
Despite our disagreement with several of its points, we welcome the fact that the NLF has put forward its first comprehensive program. We are studying that program carefully. However, we cannot ignore the fact that immediately after the offer, the scale of enemy attacks stepped up and American casualties in Vietnam increased. 
Let me make one point clear. If the enemy wants peace with the United States, that is not the way to get it. 
I have set forth a peace program tonight which is generous in its terms. I have indicated our willingness to consider other proposals. But no greater mistake could be made than to confuse flexibility with weakness or of being reasonable with lack of resolution. I must also make clear, in all candor, that if the needless suffering continues, this will affect other decisions. Nobody has anything to gain by delay. 
Reports from Hanoi indicate that the enemy has given up hope for a military victory in South Vietnam, but is counting on a collapse of American will in the United States. There could be no greater error in judgment. 
Let me be quite blunt. Our fighting men are not going to be worn down; our mediators are not going to be talked down; and our allies are not going to be let down. 
My fellow Americans, I have seen the ugly face of war in Vietnam. I have seen the wounded in field hospitals--American boys, South Vietnamese boys, North Vietnamese boys. They were different in many ways--the color of their skins, their religions, their races; some were enemies; some were friends. 
But the differences were small, compared with how they were alike. They were brave men, and they were so young. Their lives--their dreams for the future-had been shattered by a war over which they had no control. 
With all the moral authority of the Office which I hold, I say that America could have no greater and prouder role than to help to end this war in a way which will bring nearer that day in which we can have a world order in which people can live together in peace and friendship. 
I do not criticize those who disagree with me on the conduct of our peace negotiations. And I do not ask unlimited patience from a people whose hopes for peace have too often been raised and then cruelly dashed over the past 4 years. 
I have tried to present the facts about Vietnam with complete honesty, and I shall continue to do so in my reports to the American people. 
Tonight, all I ask is that you consider these facts, and, whatever our differences, that you support a program which can lead to a peace we can live with and a peace we can be proud of. Nothing could have a greater effect in convincing the enemy that he should negotiate in good faith than to see the American people united behind a generous and reasonable peace offer. 
In my campaign for the Presidency, I pledged to end this war in a way that would increase our chances to win true and lasting peace in Vietnam, in the Pacific, and in the world. I am determined to keep that pledge. If I fail to do so, I expect the American people to hold me accountable for that failure. 
But while I will never raise false expectations, my deepest hope, as I speak to you tonight, is that we shall be able to look back on this day, at that critical turning point when American initiative moved us off dead center, and forward to the time when this war would be brought to an end and when we shall be able to devote the unlimited energies and dedication of the American people to the exciting challenges of peace




233 - Remarks at the Conclusion of Discussions With President Thieu.
June 8, 1969

I believe that that communiqu? indicates the progress that has been made and the progress we can expect in the future toward a resolution of this struggle which has torn apart the people of North Vietnam, which has cost your people so much in men, in lives, and has cost our people as well



235 - Remarks on Return From Meeting With President Thieu at Midway Island.
June 10, 1969

This does not mean that the war is over. There are negotiations still to be undertaken. There is fighting still to be borne until we reach the point that we can have peace. 
But I do think, in conclusion, that this observation is worth making: By the May 14 speech that I made setting forth an eight-point program for peace, and by our action in withdrawing 25,000 American combat forces from Vietnam, we have opened wide the door to peace. 
And now we invite the leaders of North Vietnam to walk with us through that door, either by withdrawing forces, their forces, from South Vietnam as we have withdrawn ours, or by negotiating in Paris, or through both avenues. 
We believe this is the time for them to act. We have acted and acted in good faith. And if they fail to act in one direction or the other, they must bear the responsibility for blocking the road to peace and not walking through that door which we have opened



248 - The President's News Conference
June 19, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. No, we have not
I would also say further that insofar as our offers are concerned, we are not going to accede to the demands of the enemy that we have to dispose of President Thieu before they will talk. That would mean a surrender on our part, a defeat on our part, and turning over South Vietnam to the tender mercies of those who have done a great deal of damage, to those in North Vietnam




279 - Informal Remarks in Guam With Newsmen
July 25, 1969

As we look at Asia today, we see that the major world power which adopts a very aggressive attitude and a belligerent attitude in its foreign policy, Communist China, of course, is in Asia, and we find that the two minor world powers--minor, although they do have significant strength as we have learned--that most greatly threaten the peace of the world, that adopt the most belligerent foreign policy, are in Asia, North Korea and, of course, North Vietnam

Pursuing that line of reasoning a bit further then, I would like to put it in a more positive sense: When we look at the problems in Asia, the threat to peace that is presented by the growing power of Communist China, the belligerence of North Korea and North Vietnam, we should not let that obscure the great promise that is here

THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not comment on that at this time. If, after my conversations with Ambassador Bunker and possibly with General Abrams, I feel that some comment would be appropriate, I will make it then. 
But I should, Mr. Scali [John A. Scali, ABC News], correct one impression which I should not have left, and that is that Vietnam will not be a major subject for discussions. In each of the Asian countries I am going to raise with the Asian leaders the question of the extent to which they would be willing to participate in the international supervisory bodies for elections in South Vietnam and for the policing of cease fires provided we are able to get any kind of acceptance on the part of the North Vietnamese and the VC [Vietcong] on our May 14th proposal
Three years ago, Red China was furnishing over 50 percent of the military equipment, the hardware, for the North Vietnamese. Now it is approximately 80-20 the other way around





295 - Remarks Following a Meeting With President Thieu in Saigon.
July 30, 1969

As I evaluate the situation today, I wish first to point out that what happens in Vietnam, the kind of peace that we are able to achieve in Vietnam, will have an enormous impact on the future of peace and freedom in all of Asia. I say this based on what I have been told by the leaders of the countries I have already visited on my Asian trip. 
So the stakes here, important as they are for the people of North and South Vietnam, are important also to all the people of the Asian area and, of course, the people of the world. That is why the sacrifices that your people, our people, and other allied forces have been making in Vietnam are so important--so important beyond simply the vitally important object of seeing that the people of South Vietnam have theright to choose their own future. 
I also wish to point out that when I first came here in 1953, I had the opportunity not only of visiting Saigon, but also Hanoi. Since then, the country has been divided. But as I think back over those 16 years, and as I think of your statement pointing out that for 20 years you have been engaged in what is all of the difficulty of war in this now divided country, I realize how much suffering the people of South Vietnam have gone through, and also the people of North Vietnam. The time has come to stop that suffering. 
Mrs. Nixon today, accompanied by Mrs. Thieu, has visited an orphanage. The children in that orphanage are there because their parents, both mother and father, were killed in this war. 
These tragedies, whether they are in North or South Vietnam, have been going on long enough, and itistime to bring an end to the war, but to bring an end to the war in a way that will not encourage another war; bring an end to the war in a way which will provide theright to choose the kind of government they want for the people of South Vietnam, and in providing that right, make it more possible for the other nations in Southeast Asia to retain that same fight for themselves. 
I say to you, too, Mr. President, that as I look over the period that has elapsed since the time I became President of the United States, I believe the record is clear as to which side has gone the extra mile in behalf of peace. We have stopped the bombing of North Vietnam. We have withdrawn 25,000 American troops. They have been replaced by South Vietnamese. We have made, and you have made, a peace offer which is as generous as any ever made in the history of warfare. It is a peace of reconciliation that is offered, a peace in which the people will decide, a peace that is just for both sides, a peace which is fair to both sides, a peace which offers an equal chance to both sides. 
We have gone as far as we can or should go in opening the door to peace, and now itistime for the other side to respond. Otherwise, the other side must assume the responsibility for the continuing suffering among a people who have already suffered much too long both in South and North Vietnam



361 - Statement on United States Troops in Vietnam.
September 16, 1969

AFTER careful consideration with my senior civilian and military advisers and in full consultation with the Government of Vietnam, I have decided to reduce the authorized troop ceiling in Vietnam to 484,000 by December 15. This compares with the ceiling of 549,500 which existed when this administration took office. Under the newly authorized troop ceiling, a minimum of 60,000 troops will have been withdrawn from Vietnam by December 15

Since coming into office, my administration has made major efforts to bring an end to the war: 
--We have renounced an imposed military solution. 
--We have proposed free elections organized by joint commissions under international supervision. 
--We have offered the withdrawal of U.S. and allied forces over a 12-month period. 
--We have declared that we would retain no military bases. 
--We have offered to negotiate supervised cease-fires under international supervision to facilitate the process of mutual withdrawal. 
--We have made clear that we would settle for the de facto removal of North Vietnamese forces so long as there are guarantees against their return. 
--We and the Government of South Vietnam have announced that we are prepared to accept any political outcome which is arrived at through free elections. 
--We are prepared to discuss the 10-point program of the other side, together with plans put forward by the other parties. 
--In short, the only item which is notnegotiable is theright of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future free of outside interference. I reiterate all these proposals today. 
The withdrawal of 60,000 troops is a significant step. 
The time for meaningful negotiations has therefore arrived. 
I realize that it is difficult to communicate across the gulf of 5 years of war. But the time has come to end this war. Let history record that at this critical moment, both sides turned their faces toward peace rather than toward conflict and war




365 - Address Before the 24th Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.
September 18, 1969

Since I took office as President, no single question has occupied so much of my time and energy as the search for an end to the war in Vietnam--an end fair to the people of South Vietnam, fair to the people of North Vietnam, and fair to those others who would be affected by the outcome. 
We in the United States want to end this war, and we are ready to take every reasonable step to achieve that goal. But let there be no question on this one fundamental point: In good conscience we cannot-in the long term interests of peace we will not--accept a settlement that would arbitrarily dictate the political future of South Vietnam and deny to the people of South Vietnam the basic right to determine their own future free of any outside interference. 
As I put it in my address to the American people last May: "What the United States wants for South Vietnam is not the important thing. What North Vietnam wants for South Vietnam is not the important thing. What is important is what the people of South Vietnam want for South Vietnam." 
To secure this right--and to secure this principle--is our one limited but fundamental objective. 
Both in public and at the Paris talks, we have offered a number of proposals which would bring peace and provide self-determination. And we are ready to consider any other proposals that have the same objective. The missing ingredient so far has been the willingness of the other side to talk on any terms other than those that would predetermine the result and deny theright of self-determination to the people of South Vietnam. Once that willingness exists, and once there is a genuine willingness by the other side to reach agreement, the practical solutions can readily be found. 
Many urged that if only we halted our bombing of the North, peace would follow. Nearly a year has passed since the bombing of the North was halted. 
Three months have passed since we began the process of troop replacement, signaling both our own genuine desire for a settlement and the increased readiness of the South Vietnamese to manage their own defense. 
As I announced on Tuesday, by December 15 our troop strength in Vietnam will have been reduced by a minimum of 60,000 men. 
On September 2, 1969, North Vietnam's chief negotiator in Paris said that if the United States committed itself to the principle of totally withdrawing its forces from South Vietnam, and if it withdrew a significant number of troops, Hanoi would take this into account. 
I repeat here today what I said in my speech of May 14: that we are prepared to withdraw all of our forces from South Vietnam. 
And the replacement of 60,000 troops is a significant step. 
The time has come for the other side to respond to these initiatives. The time has come for peace. 
And in the name of peace, I urge all of you here--representing 126 nations-to use your best diplomatic efforts to persuade Hanoi to move seriously into the negotiations which could end this war. The steps we have taken have been responsive to views expressed in this room. And we hope that views from this organization may also be influential in Hanoi. If these efforts are successful, this war can end. 
The people of Vietnam, North and South alike, have demonstrated heroism enough to last a century. And I speak from personal observation. I have been to North Vietnam, to Hanoi, in 1953, and all over South Vietnam. I have seen the people of the North and the people of the South. The people of Vietnam, North and South, have endured an unspeakable weight of suffering for a generation. And they deserve a better future. 
When the war ends, the United States will stand ready to help the people of Vietnam--all of them in their tasks of renewal and reconstruction. And when peace comes at last to Vietnam, it can truly come with healing in its wings




374 - The President's News Conference
September 26, 1969

THE PRESIDENT. There are no American combat forces in Laos. At the present time, we are concerned by the North Vietnamese move into Laos. There are 50,000 North Vietnamese there at the present time, and more perhaps are coming. 
As you know, the American participation in Laos is at the request of the neutralist government, which was set up in accordance with the 1969 Accords, which were agreed to, incidentally, by Hanoi, Peking, and the Soviet Union. That was during the administration of President Kennedy, negotiated by Mr. Harriman [Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs
THE PRESIDENT. Not yet, and we would expect nothing yet. Each of our systems of government has a problem. The major problem in a Communist system of government is the problem of succession and the North Vietnamese are going through that. 
Immediately after a change of leadership, there is a tendency for uncertainty and rigidity as the contest for power goes on. We think that is going on within North Vietnam at the present time. However, looking to the future, as new leaders emerge, as they look at the consequences of past policy and the prospects for future policy, and as long as the United States holds to its course, I think the prospects for a possible change are there. 
I am not predicting it. I am not trying to raise false hopes. I am only suggesting that since there is new leadership, we can expect perhaps some reevaluation of policy



425 - Address to the Nation on the War in Vietnam
November 3, 1969

What are the prospects for peace? Now, let me begin by describing the situation I found when I was inaugurated on January 20. 
--The war had been going on for 4 years. 
--31,000 Americans had been killed in action. 
--The training program for the South Vietnamese was behind schedule. 
--540,000 Americans were in Vietnam with no plans to reduce the number. 
--No progress had been made at the negotiations in Paris and the United States had not put forth a comprehensive peace proposal. 
--The war was causing deep division at home and criticism from many of our friends as well as our enemies abroad. 
But I had a greater obligation than to think only of the years of my administration and of the next election. I had to think of the effect of my decision on the next generation and on the future of peace and freedom in America and in the world. 
The great question is: How can we win America's peace? 
Well, let us turn now to the fundamental issue. Why and how did the United States become involved in Vietnam in the first place? 
Fifteen years ago North Vietnam, with the logistical support of Communist China and the Soviet Union, launched a campaign to impose a Communist government on South Vietnam by instigating and supporting a revolution. 
In response to the request of the Government of South Vietnam, President Eisenhower sent economic aid and military equipment to assist the people of South Vietnam in their efforts to prevent a Communist takeover. Seven years ago, President Kennedy sent 16,000 military personnel to Vietnam as combat advisers. Four years ago, President Johnson sent American combat forces to South Vietnam. 
Now, many believe that President Johnson's decision to send American combat forces to South Vietnam was wrong. And many others--I among them--have been strongly critical of the way the war has been conducted. 
But the question facing us today is: Now that we are in the war, what is the best way to end it? 
In January I could only conclude that the precipitate withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam would be a disaster not only for South Vietnam but for the United States and for the cause of peace. 
For the South Vietnamese, our precipitate withdrawal would inevitably allow the Communists to repeat the massacres which followed their takeover in the North 15 years before. 
--They then murdered more than 50,000 people and hundreds of thousands more died in slave labor camps. 
--We saw a prelude of what would happen in South Vietnam when the Communists entered the city of Hue last year. During their brief rule there, there was a bloody reign of terror in which 3,000 civilians were clubbed, shot to death, and buried in mass graves. 
--With the sudden collapse of our support, these atrocities of Hue would become the nightmare of the entire nation--and particularly for the million and a half Catholic refugees who fled to South Vietnam when the 
Communists took over in the North. For the United States, this first defeat in our Nation's history would result in a collapse of confidence in American leadership, not only in Asia but throughout the world. 
Three American Presidents have recognized the great stakes involved in Vietnam and understood what had to be done. 
In 1963, President Kennedy, with his characteristic eloquence and clarity, said: "we want to see a stable government there, carrying on a struggle to maintain its national independence. 
"We believe strongly in that. We are not going to withdraw from that effort. In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort would mean a collapse not only of South Viet-Nam, but Southeast Asia. So we are going to stay there." 
President Eisenhower and President Johnson expressed the same conclusion during their terms of office. 
For the future of peace, precipitate withdrawal would thus be a disaster of immense magnitude. 
--A nation cannot remain great if it betrays its allies and lets down its friends. 
--Our defeat and humiliation in South Vietnam without question would promote recklessness in the councils of those great powers who have not yet abandoned their goals of world conquest. 
--This would spark violence wherever ourcommitments help maintain the peace--in the Middle East, in Berlin, eventually even in the Western Hemisphere. 
Ultimately, this would cost more lives. It would not bring peace; it would bring more war. 
For these reasons, I rejected the recommendation that I should end the war by immediately withdrawing all of our forces. I chose instead to change American policy on both the negotiating front and battlefront. 
In order to end a war fought on many fronts, I initiated a pursuit for peace on many fronts. 
In a television speech on May 14, in a speech before the United Nations, and on a number of other occasions I set forth our peace proposals in great detail. 
--We have offered the complete withdrawal of all outside forces within 1 year. 
--We have proposed a cease-fire under international supervision. 
--We have offered free elections under international supervision with the Communists participating in the organization and conduct of the elections as an organized political force. And the Saigon Government has pledged to accept the result of the elections. 
We have not put forth our proposals on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. We have indicated that we are willing to discuss the proposals that have been put forth by the other side. We have declared that anything is negotiable except the fight of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future. At the Paris peace conference, Ambassador Lodge has demonstrated our flexibility and good faith in 40 public meetings. 
Hanoi has refused even to discuss our proposals. They demand our unconditional acceptance of their terms, which are that we withdraw all American forces immediately and unconditionally and that we overthrow the Government of South Vietnam as we leave. 
We have not limited our peace initiatives to public forums and public statements. I recognized, in January, that a long and bitter war like this usually cannot be settled in a public forum. That is why in addition to the public statements and negotiations I have explored every possible private avenue that might lead to a settlement. 
Tonight I am taking the unprecedented step of disclosing to you some of our other initiatives for peace--initiatives we undertook privately and secretly because we thought we thereby might open a door which publicly would be closed. 
I did not wait for my inauguration to begin my quest for peace. 
--Soon after my election, through an individual who is directly in contact on a personal basis with the leaders of North Vietnam, I made two private offers for a rapid, comprehensive settlement. Hanoi's replies called in effect for our surrender before negotiations. 
--Since the Soviet Union furnishes most of the military equipment for North Vietnam, Secretary of State Rogers, my Assistant for National Security Affairs, Dr. Kissinger, Ambassador Lodge, and I, personally, have met on a number of occasions with representatives of the Soviet Government to enlist their assistance in getting meaningful negotiations started. In addition, we have had extended discussions directed toward that same end with representatives of other governments which have diplomatic relations with North Vietnam. None of these initiatives have to date produced results. 
--In mid-July, I became convinced that it was necessary to make a major move to break the deadlock in the Paris talks. I spoke directly in this office, where I am now sitting, with an individual who had known Ho Chi Minh [President, Democratic Republic of Vietnam] on a personal basis for 25 years. Through him I sent a letter to Ho Chi Minh. I did this outside of the usual diplomatic channels with the hope that with the necessity of making statements for propaganda removed, there might be constructive progress toward bringing the war to an end. Let me read from that letter to you now. 
"Dear Mr. President: 
"I realize that it is difficult to communicate meaningfully across the gulf of four years of war. But precisely because of this gulf, I wanted to take this opportunity to reaffirm in all solemnity my desire to work for a just peace. I deeply believe that the war in Vietnam has gone on too long and delay in bringing it to an end can benefit no one--least of all the people of Vietnam .... 
"The time has come to move forward at the conference table toward an early resolution of this tragic war. You will find us forthcoming and open-minded in a common effort to bring the blessings of peace to the brave people of Vietnam. Let history record that at this critical juncture, both sides turned their face toward peace rather than toward conflict and war." 
I received Ho Chi Minh's reply on August 30, 3 days before his death. It simply reiterated the public position North Vietnam had taken at Paris and flatly rejected my initiative. 
The full text of both letters is being released to the press. 
--In addition to the public meetings that I have referred to, Ambassador Lodge has met with Vietnam's chief negotiator in Paris in 11 private sessions. 
--We have taken other significant initiatives which must remain secret to keep open some channels of communication which may still prove to be productive. But the effect of all the public, private, and secret negotiations which have been undertaken since the bombing halt a year ago and since this administration came into office on January 20, can be summed up in one sentence: No progress whatever has been made except agreement on the shape of the bargaining table. Well now, who is at fault? 
It has become clear that the obstacle in negotiating an end to the war is not the President of the United States. It is not the South Vietnamese Government. 
The obstacle is the other side's absolute refusal to show the least willingness to join us in seeking a just peace. And it will not do so while it is convinced that all it has to do is to wait for our next concession, and our next concession after that one, until it gets everything it wants. 
There can now be no longer any question that progress in negotiation depends only on Hanoi's deciding to negotiate, to negotiate seriously. 
I realize that this report on our efforts on the diplomatic front is discouraging to the American people, but the American people are entitled to know the truth-the bad news as well as the good news-where the lives of our young men are involved. 
Now let me turn, however, to a more encouraging report on another front. 
At the time we launched our search for peace I recognized we might not succeed in bringing an end to the war through negotiation. I, therefore, put into effect another plan to bring peace--a plan which will bring the war to an end regardless of what happens on the negotiating front. 
Well, in accordance with this wise counsel, I laid down in Guam three principles as guidelines for future American policy toward Asia: 
--First, the United States will keep all of its treaty commitments. 
--Second, we shall provide a shield if a nuclear power threatens the freedom of a nation allied with us or of a nation whose survival we consider vital to our security. 
--Third, in cases involving other types of aggression, we shall furnish military and economic assistance when requested in accordance with our treaty commitments. But we shall look to the nation directly threatened to assume the primary responsibility of providing the manpower for its defense. 
Two other significant developments have occurred since this administration took office. 
--Enemy infiltration, infiltration which is essential if they are to launch a major attack, over the last 3 months is less than 20 percent of what it was over the same period last year. 
If the level of enemy activity significantly increases we might have to adjust our timetable accordingly. 
However, I want the record to be completely clear on one point. 
At the time of the bombing halt just a year ago, there was some confusion as to whether there was an understanding on the part of the enemy that if we stopped the bombing of North Vietnam they would stop the shelling of cities in South Vietnam. I want to be sure that there is no misunderstanding on the part of the enemy with regard to our withdrawal program. 
We have noted the reduced level of infiltration, the reduction of our casualties, and are basing our withdrawal decisions partially on those factors. 
If the level of infiltration or our casualties increase while we are trying to scale down the fighting, it will be the result of a conscious decision by the enemy. 
Hanoi could make no greater mistake than to assume that an increase in violence will be to its advantage. If I conclude that increased enemy action jeopardizes our remaining forces in Vietnam, I shall not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation. 
This is not a threat. This is a statement of policy, which as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces, I am making in meeting my responsibility for the protection of American fighting men wherever they may be. 
My fellow Americans, I am sure you can recognize from what I have said that we really only have two choices open to us if we want to end this war. 
--I can order an immediate, precipitate withdrawal of all Americans from Vietnam without regard to the effects of that action. 
--Or we can persist in our search for a just peace through a negotiated settlement if possible, or through continued implementation of our plan for Vietnamization if necessary--a plan in which we will withdraw all of our forces from Vietnam on a schedule in accordance with our program, as the South Vietnamese become strong enough to defend their own freedom. I have chosen this second course. It is not the easy way. It is theright way. 
It is a plan which will end the war and serve the cause of peace--not just in Vietnam but in the Pacific and in the world. 
I share your concern for peace. I want peace as much as you do. There are powerful personal reasons I want to end this war. This week I will have to sign 83 letters to mothers, fathers, wives, and loved ones of men who have given their lives for America in Vietnam. It is very little satisfaction to me that this is only one-third as many letters as I signed the first week in office. There is nothing I want more than to see the day come when I do not have to write any of those letters. 
--I want to end the war to save the lives of those brave young men in Vietnam. 
--But I want to end it in a way which will increase the chance that their younger brothers and their sons will not have to fight in some future Vietnam someplace in the world. 
--And I want to end the war for another reason. I want to end it so that the energy and dedication of you, our young people, now too often directed into bitter hatred against those responsible for the war, can be turned to the great challenges of peace, a better life for all Americans, a better life for all people on this earth. 
I have chosen a plan for peace. I believe it will succeed. 
I pledged in my campaign for the Presidency to end the war in a way that we could win the peace. I have initiated a plan of action which will enable me to keep that pledge. 
Let us be united for peace. Let us also be united against defeat. Because let us understand: North Vietnam cannot defeat or humiliate the United States. Only Americans can do that. 
Tonight I do not tell you that the war in Vietnam is the war to end wars. But I do say this: I have initiated a plan which will end this war in a way that will bring us closer to that great goal to which Woodrow Wilson and every American President in our history has been dedicated--the goal of a just and lasting peace. 



481 - The President's News Conference
December 8, 1969

We are attempting to uphold those accords and we are doing that despite the fact that North Vietnam has 50,000 troops in Laos. We are also, as I have publicly indicated and as you know, interdicting the Ho Chi Minh Trail as it runs through Laos. Beyond that, I don't think the public interest would be served by any further discussion



484 - Remarks Following a Meeting With Wives and Mothers of Prisoners of War and Servicemen Missing in Action in Vietnam.
December 12, 1969

The American people, I am sure, are unanimous in expressing their sympathy to these women, to their children, and also in supporting their Government's attempt to get the Government of North Vietnam and the VC to respond to the many initiatives which we have undertaken to get this issue separated out and progress made on it prior to the time that we reach a complete settlement of the war



486 - Address to the Nation on Progress Toward Peace in Vietnam.
December 15, 1969

As you will recall, I said then that we were proceeding in our pursuit for peace on two fronts: a peace settlement through negotiation, or if that fails, ending the war through Vietnamization, a plan we have developed with the South Vietnamese for the complete withdrawal, first, of all U.S. combat troops, and eventually of other forces and their replacement by South Vietnamese forces on an orderly scheduled timetable. 
I must report to you tonight with regret that there has been no progress whatever on the negotiating front since November 3. The enemy still insists on a unilateral, precipitate withdrawal of American forces and on a political settlement which would mean the imposition of a Communist government on the people of South Vietnam against their will, and defeat and humiliation for the United States. 
This we cannot and will notaccept. Typical of their attitude is their absolute refusal to talk about the fate of the American prisoners they hold and their refusal even to supply their names so as to ease the anguish of their loved ones in the United States. This cruel, indefensible action is a shocking demonstration of the inflexible attitude they have taken on all issues at the negotiating table in Paris. 
But despite their attitude, we shall continue to participate in the Paris talks and to seek a negotiated peace--one which is fair, fair to North Vietnam, fair to the United States, but most important, fair to the people of South Vietnam. Because as I have indicated, anything is negotiable except theright of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own fate. 
Let me turn now to the progress of our plan for Vietnamization and our troop withdrawal program. 
When I announced this program in June, I said that the rate of withdrawal would depend on three criteria: progress in the Paris negotiations, progress in the training of South Vietnamese forces, and the level of enemy activity. 
Now, while there' has been no progress on the negotiating front, I have a much more favorable report to give to you tonight with regard to the training of South Vietnamese forces. 
Now, there is one disturbing new development, however, with regard to enemy activity. Enemy infiltration has increased substantially. It has not yet reached the point where our military leaders believe the enemy has developed the capability to mount a major offensive, but we are watching the situation closely to see whether it could develop to that extent. 
Now for the decision. Taking all these developments into consideration, I am announcing tonight a reduction in our troop ceiling of 50,000 more U.S. troops by April 15 next year. This means that the ceiling which existed when I took office on January 20 has now been reduced by 115,500 men. This reduction has been made with the approval of the Government of South Vietnam, and in consultation with the other nations which have combat forces in Vietnam. 
Now there are some who believe that to continue our withdrawals at a time when enemy infiltration is increasing is a risk we should not take. However, I have consistently said we must take risks for peace. 
And in that connection, let me remind the leaders in Hanoi that if their infiltration and the level of enemy activity increases while we are reducing our forces they also will be running a risk. I repeat the statement I made in my speech on November 3: 
"Hanoi could make no greater mistake than to assume that an increase in violence will be to its advantage. If I conclude that increased enemy action jeopardizes our remaining forces in Vietnam, I shall not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation." 
This reduction in our forces is another orderly step in our plan for peace in Vietnam. 
It marks further progress toward turning over the defense of South Vietnam to the South Vietnamese. 
And it is another clear sign of our readiness to bring an end to the war and to achieve a just peace. 
The leaders in Hanoi have declared on a number of occasions that division in the United States would eventually bring them the victory they cannot win over our fighting men in Vietnam. This demonstration of support by the American people for our plan to bring a just peace has dashed those hopes. 
Hanoi should abandon its dreams of military victory. 
Itistime for them to join us in serious negotiations. There is nothing to be gained by delay. 
If Hanoi is willing to talk seriously they will find us flexible and forthcoming. 
I am glad that I was able to report tonight some progress in reaching our goal of a just peace in Vietnam. After 5 years of increasing the number of Americans in Vietnam, we are bringing American men home. 
Our casualties continue to be at the lowest rate in 3 years. 
But I want you to know that despite this progress, I shall not be satisfied until we achieve the goal we all want: an end to the war on a just and lasting basis. 



20 - The President's News Conference
January 30, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. Well, as you know, Le Duc Tho, at least according to press reports, has arrived in Paris to attend a Communist Party meeting that is being held there. Now, whether he will now participate in the negotiations again or whether we could have an opportunity to have discussions with him remains to be seen. I can only say that we have a very competent Ambassador there in Mr. Habib. He has instructions to explore every possible avenue for a breakthrough in the negotiations, and if an opportunity is presented, he will do so

THE PRESIDENT. We have had no evidence of any effect yet on the North Vietnamese. They are just as recalcitrant in their position as they have been and just as stubborn. On the other hand, we haven't given up hope. We continue to meet with them each week. We continue to be as forthcoming as we can. 
I would say that the fact that we have had more support, and I should say perhaps more understanding of our policy and, therefore, more support for it than previously, should be an incentive for the North Vietnamese to negotiate, because that is a message to them that they aren't going to win--they have nothing to gain by delay. They are not going to win their ends by a division in the United States. 
THE PRESIDENT. I answered that same question in my press conference approximately a month ago in this room and I will not go beyond that answer at this point, except to say that the North Vietnamese have 50,000 troops in Laos and thereby threaten the survival of Laos. 
Our activities there are solely for the purpose of seeing that the Laotian Government--which was set up by the Laotian accords, and at their request--for the purpose of seeing that they are not overwhelmed by the North Vietnamese and other Communist forces. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Roberts, first, how long any units remain in Viet-Nam will depend upon whether we have a breakthrough in negotiations. 
Assuming--and I assume this is the basis for your question--there is no breakthrough in negotiations, then we still stand on what I announced on November 3d, that our plan envisages the complete withdrawal of all American combat forces. But it does also envisage support for the South Vietnamese logistically and, until they are ready to take over, support in the sea and support in the air, where you have highly sophisticated training programs involved, will stay there for a longer time than support in terms of ground forces. I think I will just stand on that statement




87 - The President's News Conference
March 21, 1970

I will simply say that we respect Cambodia's neutrality. We would hope that North Vietnam would take that same position in respecting its neutrality. And we hope that whatever government eventually prevails there, that it would recognize that the United States interest is the protection of its neutrality. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the Thai interest in Laos and the Thai participation in attempting to sustain the neutralist Government of Laos, I think, has been known for years; and their interest is, if anything, perhaps even more acute than ours. They have a 1,000-mile border with Laos. There are 8 million ethnic Laotians, as you know, who live in northeast Thailand. And if Laos were to come under the domination of a Communist North Vietnamese Government, it would be an enormous threat to Thailand. 
Thailand also is a signatory of the Geneva accords of 1962 and under those circumstances would be expected to respond to requests by the Government of Laos, set up under those accords and agreed to by all of the parties including the North Vietnamese and the Communist Chinese, and would be expected to provide some assistance



126 - Address to the Nation on Progress Toward Peace in Vietnam.
April 20, 1970

When I first outlined our program last June, I stated that the rate of American withdrawals from Vietnam would depend on three criteria: progress in the training of the South Vietnamese, progress in the Paris negotiations, and the level of enemy activity. 
Tonight I am pleased to report that progress in training and equipping South Vietnamese forces has substantially exceeded our original expectations last June. 
Very significant advances have also been made in pacification. 
Although we recognize that problems remain, these are encouraging trends. 
However, I must report with regret that no progress has taken place on the negotiating front. The enemy still demands that we unilaterally and unconditionally withdraw all American forces, that in the process we overthrow the elected Government of South Vietnam, and that the United States accept a political settlement that would have the practical consequence of the forcible imposition of a Communist government upon the people of South Vietnam. 
That would mean humiliation and defeat for the United States. This we cannot and will notaccept. 
Let me now turn to the third criteria for troop withdrawals--the level of enemy activity. In several areas since December, that level has substantially increased. 
In recent months Hanoi has sent thousands more of their soldiers to launch new offensives in neutral Laos in violation of the Geneva Accords of 1969 to which they were signatories. 
South of Laos, almost 40,000 Communist troops are now conducting overt aggression against Cambodia, a small neutralist country that the Communists have used for years as a base for attack upon South Vietnam in violation of the Geneva Accords of 1954 to which they were also signatories. 
This follows the consistent pattern of North Vietnamese aggression in Indochina. During the past 8 years they have sent tens of thousands of troops into all three countries of the peninsula and across every single common border. 
Men and supplies continue to pour down the Ho Chi Minh Trail; and in the past 2 weeks, the Communists have stepped up their attacks upon allied forces in South Vietnam. 
However, despite this new enemy activity, there has been an overall decline in enemy force levels in South Vietnam since December.
As the enemy force levels have declined and as the South Vietnamese have assumed more of the burden of battle, American casualties have declined. 
I am glad to be able to report tonight that in the first 3 months of 1970, the number of Americans killed in action dropped to the lowest first quarter level in 5 years. 
In June, a year ago, when we began troop withdrawals, we did so on a "cut and try" basis--with no certainty that the program would be successful. In June we announced withdrawal of 25,000 American troops; in September another 35,000 and then in December 50,000 more. These withdrawals have now been completed and as of April 15, a total of 115,500 men have returned home from Vietnam. 
We have now reached a point where we can confidently move from a period of "cut and try" to a longer-range program for the replacement of Americans by South Vietnamese troops. 
I am, therefore, tonight announcing plans for the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops to be completed during the spring of next year. This will bring a total reduction of 265,500 men in our Armed Forces in Vietnam below the level that existed when we took office 15 months ago. 
The timing and pace of these new withdrawals within the overall schedule will be determined by our best judgment of the current military and diplomatic situation. 
This far-reaching decision was made after consultation with our commanders in the field, and it has the approval of the Government of South Vietnam. 
Now, viewed against the enemy's escalation in Laos and Cambodia, and in view of the stepped-up attacks this month in South Vietnam, this decision clearly involves risks. 
But I again remind the leaders of North Vietnam that while we are taking these risks for peace, they will be taking grave risks should they attempt to use the occasion to jeopardize the security of our remaining forces in Vietnam by increased military action in Vietnam, in Cambodia, or in Laos. 
I repeat what I said November 3d and December 15th. If I conclude that increased enemy action jeopardizes our remaining forces in Vietnam, I shall not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation. 
My responsibility as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces is for the safety of our men, and I shall meet that responsibility. The decision I have announced tonight to withdraw 150,000 more men over the next year is based entirely on the progress of our Vietnamization program. 
There is a better, shorter path to peace--through negotiations. We shall withdraw more than 150,000 over the next year if we make progress at the negotiating front. 
Had the other side responded positively at Paris to our offer of May 14 last year, most American and foreign troops would have left South Vietnam by now. 
A political settlement is the heart of the matter. That is what the fighting in Indochina has been about over the past 30 years. 
Now, we have noted with interest the recent statement by Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Malik concerning a possible new Geneva conference on Indochina. 
We do not yet know the full implications of this statement. It is in the spirit of the letters I wrote on April 7, to signatories of the 1962 Geneva Accords urging consultations and observance of the Accords. We have consistently said we were willing to explore any reasonable path to peace. We are in the process of exploring this one. 
But whatever the fate of this particular move we are ready for a settlement fair to everyone. 
Let me briefly review for you the principles that govern our view of a just political settlement. 
First, our overriding objective is a political solution that reflects the will of the South Vietnamese people and allows them to determine their future without outside interference. 
I again reaffirm this Government's acceptance of eventual, total withdrawal of American troops. In turn, we must see the permanent withdrawal of all North Vietnamese troops and be given reasonable assurances that they will not return. 
Second, a fair political solution should reflect the existing relationship of political forces within South Vietnam. We recognize the complexity of shaping machinery that would fairly apportion political power in South Vietnam. We are flexible; we have offered nothing on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. 
And third, we will abide by the outcome of the political process agreed upon. President Thieu and I have repeatedly stated our willingness to accept the free decision of the South Vietnamese people. But we will not agree to the arrogant demand that the elected leaders of the Government of Vietnam be overthrown before real negotiations begin. 
Let me briefly review the record of our efforts to end the war in Vietnam through negotiations. 
We were told repeatedly in the past that our adversaries would negotiate seriously
--if only we stopped the bombing of North Vietnam;
--if only we began withdrawing our forces from South Vietnam;
--if only we dealt with the National Liberation Front as one of the parties to the negotiations;
--if only we would agree in principle to removal of all of our forces from Vietnam. 
We have taken all these steps. 
The United States, over a year and a half ago, stopped all bombing of North Vietnam. Long ago we agreed to negotiate with the National Liberation Front as one of the parties. We have already withdrawn 115,500 American troops. Tonight I have announced a decision to reduce American force levels by a quarter of a million men from what they were
15 months ago. We have offered repeatedly to withdraw all of our troops if the North Vietnamese would withdraw theirs. We have taken risks for peace that every fair and objective man can readily recognize. 
And still there is no progress at the negotiating table. 
It is Hanoi and Hanoi alone that stands today blocking the path to a just peace for all the peoples of Southeast Asia. 
The death of a single man in war, whether he is an American, a South Vietnamese, a Vietcong, or a North Vietnamese, is a human tragedy. That is why we want to end this war and achieve a just peace. We callupon our adversaries to join us in working at the conference table toward that goal. 
No Presidential statement on Vietnam would be complete without an expression of our concern for the fate of the American prisoners of war. 
The callous exploitation of the anxieties and anguish of the parents, the wives, the children of these brave men, as negotiating pawns, is an unforgivable breach of the elementary rules of conduct between civilized peoples. We shall continue to make every possible effort to get Hanoi to provide information on the whereabouts of all prisoners, to allow them to communicate with their families, to permit inspection of prisoners-of-war camps, and to provide for the early release of at least the sick and the wounded. 
The decision I have announced tonight means that we finally have in sight the just peace we are seeking. We can now say with confidence that pacification is succeeding. We can now say with confidence that the South Vietnamese can develop the capability for their own defense. And we can say with confidence that all American combat forces can and will be withdrawn. 
The enemy has failed to win the war in Vietnam because of three basic errors in their strategy. 
They thought they could win a military victory. They have failed to do so. 
They thought they could win politically in South Vietnam. They have failed to do so. 
They thought they could win politically in the United States. This proved to be their most fatal miscalculation. 
In this great free country of ours, we debate--we disagree, sometimes violently, but the mistake the totalitarians make over and over again is to conclude that debate in a free country is proof of weakness. We are not a weak people. We are a strong people. America has never been defeated in the proud 190-year history of this country, and we shall not be defeated in Vietnam. 
It is your steadiness and your stamina that the leaders of North Vietnam are watching tonight. It is these qualities, as much as any proposals, that will bring them to negotiate. 
It is America's resolve, as well as America's reasonableness, that will achieve our goal of a just peace in Vietnam and strengthen the foundations of a just and lasting peace in the Pacific and throughout the world



139 - Address to the Nation on the Situation in Southeast Asia.
April 30, 1970

Ten days ago, in my report to the Nation on Vietnam, I announced a decision to withdraw an additional 150,000 Americans from Vietnam over the next year. I said then that I was making that decision despite our concern over increased enemy activity in Laos, in Cambodia, and in South Vietnam. 
At that time, I warned that if I concluded that increased enemy activity in any of these areas endangered the lives of Americans remaining in Vietnam, I would not hesitate to take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation. 
Despite that warning, North Vietnam has increased its military aggression in all these areas, and particularly in Cambodia. 
After full consultation with the National Security Council, Ambassador Bunker, General Abrams, and my other advisers, I have concluded that the actions of the enemy in the last 10 days clearly endanger the lives of Americans who are in Vietnam now and would constitute an unacceptable risk to those who will be there after withdrawal of another 150,000. 
To protect our men who are in Vietnam and to guarantee the continued success of our withdrawal and Vietnamization programs, I have concluded that the time has come for action. 
Tonight, I shall describe the actions of the enemy, the actions I have ordered to deal with that situation, and the reasons for my decision. 
Cambodia, a small country of 7 million people, has been a neutral nation since the Geneva agreement of 1954--an agreement, incidentally, which was signed by the Government of North Vietnam. 
North Vietnam, however, has not respected that neutrality. 
For the past 5 years--as indicated on this map that you see here--North Vietnam has occupied military sanctuaries all along the Cambodian frontier with South Vietnam. Some of these extend up to 20 miles into Cambodia. The sanctuaries are in red and, as you note, they are on both sides of the border. They are used for hit and run attacks on American and South Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam. 
These Communist occupied territories contain major base camps, training sites, logistics facilities, weapons and ammunition factories, airstrips, and prisoner-of. war compounds. 
For 5 years, neither the United States nor South Vietnam has moved against these enemy sanctuaries because we did not wish to violate the territory of a neutral nation. Even after the Vietnamese Communists began to expand these sanctuaries 4 weeks ago, we counseled patience to our South Vietnamese allies and imposed restraints on our own commanders. 
In contrast to our policy, the enemy in the past 2 weeks has stepped up his guerrilla actions and he is concentrating his main forces in these sanctuaries that you see on this map where they are building up to launch massive attacks on our forces and those of South Vietnam. 
North Vietnam in the last 2 weeks has stripped away all pretense of respecting the sovereignty or the neutrality of Cambodia. Thousands of their soldiers are invading the country from the sanctuaries; they are encircling the capital of Phnom Penh. Coming from these sanctuaries, as you see here, they have moved into Cambodia and are encircling the capital. 
Cambodia, as a result of this, has sent out a call to the United States, to a number of other nations, for assistance. Because if this enemy effort succeeds, Cambodia would become a vast enemy staging area and a springboard for attacks on South Vietnam along 600 miles of frontier--a refuge where enemy troops could return from combat without fear of retaliation. 
North Vietnamese men and supplies could then be poured into that country, jeopardizing not only the lives of our own men but the people of South Vietnam as well. 
Now confronted with this situation, we have three options. 
First, we can do nothing. Well, the ultimate result of that course of action is clear. Unless we indulge in wishful thinking, the lives of Americans remaining in Vietnam after our next withdrawal of 150,000 would be gravely threatened. 
Let us go to the map again. Here is South Vietnam. Here is North Vietnam. North Vietnam already occupies this part of Laos. If North Vietnam also occupied this whole band in Cambodia, or the entire country, it would mean that South Vietnam was completely outflanked and the forces of Americans in this area, as well as the South Vietnamese, would be in an untenable military position. 
Our second choice is to provide massive military assistance to Cambodia itself. Now unfortunately, while we deeply sympathize with the plight of 7 million Cambodians whose country is being invaded, massive amounts of military assistance could not be rapidly and effectively utilized by the small Cambodian Army against the immediate threat. With other nations, we shall do our best to provide the small arms and other equipment which the Cambodian Army of 40,000 needs and can use for its defense. But the aid we will provide will be limited to the purpose of enabling Cambodia to defend its neutrality and not for the purpose of making it an active belligerent on one side or the other. 
Our third choice is to go to the heart of the trouble. That means cleaning out major North Vietnamese and Vietcong occupied territories--these sanctuaries which serve as bases for attacks on both Cambodia and American and South Vietnamese forces in South Vietnam. Some of these, incidentally, are as close to Saigon as Baltimore is to Washington. This one, for example [indicating], is called the Parrot's Beak. It is only 33 miles from Saigon. 
Now faced with these three options, this is the decision I have made. 
In cooperation with the armed forces of South Vietnam, attacks are being launched this week to clean out major enemy sanctuaries on the Cambodian-Vietnam border. 
Tonight, American and South Vietnamese units will attack the headquarters for the entire Communist military operation in South Vietnam. This key control center has been occupied by the North Vietnamese and Vietcong for 5 years in blatant violation of Cambodia's neutrality. 
This is not an invasion of Cambodia. The areas in which these attacks will be launched are completely occupied and controlled by North Vietnamese forces. Our purpose is not to occupy the areas. Once enemy forces are driven out of these sanctuaries and once their military supplies are destroyed, we will withdraw. 
A majority of the American people, a majority of you listening to me, are for the withdrawal of our forces from Vietnam. The action I have taken tonight is indispensable for the continuing success of that withdrawal program. 
A majority of the American people want to end this war rather than to have it drag on interminably. The action I have taken tonight will serve that purpose. 
A majority of the American people want to keep the casualties of our brave men in Vietnam at an absolute minimum. The action I take tonight is essential if we are to accomplish that goal. 
We take this action not for the purpose of expanding the war into Cambodia but for the purpose of ending the war in Vietnam and winning the just peace we all desire. We have made--we will continue to make every possible effort to end this war through negotiation at the conference table rather than through more fighting on the battlefield. 
Let us look again at the record. We have stopped the bombing of North Vietnam. We have cut air operations by over 20 percent. We have announced withdrawal of over 250,000 of our men. We have offered to withdraw all of our men if they will withdraw theirs. We have offered to negotiate all issues with only one condition--and that is that the future of South Vietnam be determined not by North Vietnam, and not by the United States, but by the people of South Vietnam themselves. 
The answer of the enemy has been intransigence at the conference table, belligerence in Hanoi, massive military aggression in Laos and Cambodia, and stepped-up attacks in South Vietnam, designed to increase American casualties. 
This attitude has become intolerable. We will not react to this threat to American lives merely by plaintive diplomatic protests. If we did, the credibility of the United States would be destroyed in every area of the world where only the power of the United States deters aggression. 
Tonight, I again warn the North Vietnamese that if they continue to escalate the fighting when the United States is withdrawing its forces, I shall meet my responsibility as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces to take the action I consider necessary to defend the security of our American men. 
The action that I have announced tonight puts the leaders of North Vietnam on notice that we will be patient in working for peace; we will be conciliatory at the conference table, but we will not be humiliated. We will not be defeated. We will notallow American men by the thousands to be killed by an enemy from privileged sanctuaries. 
The time came long ago to end this war through peaceful negotiations. We stand ready for those negotiations. We have made major efforts, many of which must remain secret. I say tonight: All the offers and approaches made previously remain on the conference table whenever Hanoi is ready to negotiate seriously. 
But if the enemy response to our most conciliatory offers for peaceful negotiation continues to be to increase its attacks and humiliate and defeat us, we shall react accordingly. 
It is not our power but our will and character that is being tested tonight. The question all Americans must ask and answer tonight is this: Does the richest and strongest nation in the history of the world have the character to meet a direct challenge by a group which rejects every effort to win a just peace, ignores our warning, tramples on solemn agreements, violates the neutrality of an unarmed people, and uses our prisoners as hostages? 
If we fail to meet this challenge, all other nations will be on notice that despite its overwhelming power the United States, when a real crisis comes, will be found wanting. 
During my campaign for the Presidency, I pledged to bring Americans home from Vietnam. They are coming home. 
I promised to end this war. I shall keep that promise. 
I promised to win a just peace. I shall keep that promise. 
We shall avoid a wider war. But we are also determined to put an end to this war. 
No one is more aware than I am of the political consequences of the action I have taken. It is tempting to take the easy political path: to blame this war on previous administrations and to bring all of our men home immediately, regardless of the consequences, even though that would mean defeat for the United States; to desert 18 million South Vietnamese people, who have put their trust in us and to expose them to the same slaughter and savagery which the leaders of North Vietnam inflicted on hundreds of thousands of North Vietnamese who chose freedom when the Communists took over North Vietnam in 1954; to get peace at any price now, even though I know that a peace of humiliation for the United States would lead to a bigger war or surrender later. 
Whether my party gains in November is nothing compared to the lives of 400,000 brave Americans fighting for our country and for the cause of peace and freedom in Vietnam. Whether I may be a one-term President is insignificant compared to whether by our failure to act in this crisis the United States proves itself to be unworthy to lead the forces of freedom in this critical period in world history. I would rather be a one-term President and do what I believe is right than to be a two-term President at the cost of seeing America become a second-rate power and to see this Nation accept the first defeat in its proud 190-year history. 
I realize that in this war there are honest and deep differences in this country about whether we should have become involved, that there are differences as to how the war should have been conducted. But the decision I announce tonight transcends those differences.
For the lives of American men are involved. The opportunity for Americans to come home in the next 12 months is involved. The future of 18 million people in South Vietnam and 7 million people in Cambodia is involved. The possibility of winning a just peace in Vietnam and in the Pacific is at stake. 



144 - The President's News Conference
May 8, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. I am not going to speculate as to what the North Vietnamese may do. I will only say that if the North Vietnamese did what some have suggested they might do--move a massive force of 250, 000 to 300,000 across the DMZ against our Marine Corps people who are there--I would certainly notallow those men to be massacred without using more force and more effective force against North Vietnam. 
I think we have warned the leaders of North Vietnam on this point several times, and because we have warned them I do not believe they will move across the DMZ
THE PRESIDENT. I am planning to give a report to the Nation when our own actions are completed, toward the latter part of June. At that time, I will answer that question in full. 
At the present time, I will say that it is my belief, based on what we have accomplished to date, that we have bought at least 6 months and probably 8 months of time for the training of the ARVN, the Army of South Vietnam. We have also saved, I think, hundreds, if not thousands, of Americans, as Frank Reynolds reported tonight on ABC. Rockets by the thousands and small arms ammunition by the millions have already been captured and those rockets and small arms will not be killing Americans in these next few months. And what we have also accomplished is that by buying time, it means that if the enemy does come back into those sanctuaries next time, the South Vietnamese will be strong enough and well trained enough to handle it alone. 
I should point out, too, that they are handling a majority of the assignment now in terms of manpower.



175 - Address to the Nation on the Cambodian Sanctuary Operation
June 3, 1970

One month ago, I announced a decision ordering American participation with South Vietnamese forces in a series of operations against Communist-occupied areas in Cambodia which have been used for 5 years as bases for attacks on our forces in South Vietnam. 
Based on General Abrams' report, I can now state that this has been the most successful operation of this long and very difficult war. 
Before going into the details which form the basis for this conclusion, I believe it would be helpful to review briefly why I considered it necessary to make this decision, what our objectives were, and the prospects for achieving those objectives. 
You will recall that on April 20, I announced the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops from Vietnam within a year--which will bring the total number withdrawn, since I have taken office, to 260,000. I also reaffirmed on that occasion our proposals for a negotiated peace. At the time of this announcement I warned that if the enemy tried to take advantage of our withdrawal program by increased attacks in Cambodia, Laos, or South Vietnam in a way that endangered the lives of our men remaining in South Vietnam, I would, in my capacity as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces, take strong action to deal with that threat. 
Between April 20th and April 30th, Communist forces launched a series of attacks against a number of key cities in neutral Cambodia. Their objective was unmistakable--to link together bases they had maintained in Cambodia for 5 years in violation of Cambodian neutrality. The entire 600-mile Cambodian-South Vietnam border would then have become one continuous hostile territory from which to launch assaults upon American and allied forces. 
This posed an unacceptable threat to our remaining forces in South Vietnam. It would have meant higher casualties. It would have jeopardized our program for troop withdrawals. It would have meant a longer war. And--carried out in the face of an explicit warning from this Government--failure to deal with the enemy action would have eroded the credibility of the United States before the entire world. 
After very intensive consultations with my top advisers, I directed that American troops join the South Vietnamese in destroying these major enemy bases along the Cambodian frontier. I said when I made this announcement, "Our purpose is not to occupy the areas. Once enemy forces are driven out of these sanctuaries and once their military supplies are destroyed, we will withdraw." That pledge is being kept. I said further on that occasion, "We take this action not for the purpose of expanding the war into Cambodia but for the purpose of ending the war in Vietnam." That purpose is being advanced. 
As of today I can report that all of our major military objectives have been achieved. Forty-three thousand South Vietnamese took part in these operations, along with 31,000 Americans. Our combined forces have moved with greater speed and success than we had planned; we have captured and destroyed far more in war material than we anticipated; and American and allied casualties have been far lower than we expected. 
To the North Vietnamese tonight I say again: The door to a negotiated peace remains wide open. Every offer we have made at the conference table, publicly or privately, I herewith reaffirm. We are ready to negotiate whenever they are ready to negotiate. 
However, if their answer to our troop withdrawal program and to our offer to negotiate is to increase their attacks in a way that jeopardizes the safety of our remaining forces in Vietnam, I shall, as my action 5 weeks ago clearly demonstrated, take strong and effective measures to deal with that situation. 
Ask yourselves this question: If an American President had failed to meet this threat to 400,000 American men in Vietnam, would those nations and peoples who rely on America's power and treaty commitments for their security--in Latin America, Europe, the Mideast, or other parts of Asia--retain any confidence in the United States? That is why I deeply believe that a just peace in Vietnam is essential if there is to be a lasting peace in other parts of the world. 
In June of 1969, I pledged a withdrawal of 25,000 troops. They came home. In September of the same year I said I would bring home an additional 35,000. They came home. In December I said an additional 50,000 Americans were coming out of Vietnam. They, too, have come home. 
There is one commitment yet to be fulfilled. I have pledged to end this war. I shall keep that promise. But I am determined to end the war in a way that will promote peace rather than conflict throughout the world. I am determined to end it in a way that will bring an era of reconciliation to our people and not an era of furious recrimination. 
Peace is the goal that unites us. Peace is the goal toward which we are working. And peace is the goal this Government will pursue until the day that we reach it




208 - A Conversation With the President About Foreign Policy.
July 1, 1970

We believe that in appointing Ambassador Bruce we have selected a man who is superbly qualified to conduct these negotiations. He will have great flexibility in the conduct of his talks. We hope that this move on our part will be reciprocated by a similar move on the part of the North Vietnamese in attempting to find a peaceful solution to the war in Vietnam

THE PRESIDENT. We have had no signals from Hanoi directly or indirectly that their position of intransigence has changed. They still insist that their condition for a negotiated settlement is complete withdrawal of our forces and the throwing out of the government in South Vietnam as we leave. 
On the other hand, we believe that they will be interested in the fact that we are appointing a new chief of delegation, because on several occasions, not particularly from them but from third parties who have talked to them, they have indicated that they felt that we should appoint a new chief of delegation. 
We have now appointed one and we hope that they act. As far as new proposals are concerned, I think it is important for us to know what our proposals are, because we have made some very forthcoming proposals. 
First, we have offered to withdraw all of our forces if they withdraw theirs, and to have that withdrawal internationally supervised. 
Second, we have offered to have cease-fires throughout the country, and have those cease-fires again internationally supervised. 
Third, and most important, we have offered to have free elections throughout the country, internationally supervised. We have offered to have the supervisory bodies be ones in which the Communists can participate as well as those representing the present government in South Vietnam; and we have offered on our part, and the South Vietnamese Government has offered on its part, to accept the results of that election, even though those results might include Communists in some positions, or Communists in some power. 
We believe that these offers are very forthcoming, and I should also say that in private channels we have elaborated on these offers. 
Finally, I should also point out that we have not made our proposals on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. Ambassador Bruce will be in that position. He will be in a position with his new instructions to tell the opposition that we have laid these proposals out; we believe they are the formula that should provide the basis for a negotiated peace, but that we are willing to see whether we can narrow the gap between their position and ours. 
There is only one matter that is not subject to negotiation, and that is the tight of the South Vietnamese to determine their own future. 
That is one of the reasons, for example, that the speculation with regard to our having changed our position and agreeing possibly to now offer a coalition government, a negotiated settlement imposing a coalition government, that speculation is not correct. 
It is not correct, because if we were to negotiate with the North Vietnamese and decide that we would have a coalition government and impose it on the South Vietnamese, that is a government without their choice. 
If the South Vietnamese on the other hand in the free political process should choose Communists as well as non-Communists and out of that should come a government that is mixed, that is up to them. 
But we will not impose a coalition government against the will, and without the consent, of the people of South Vietnam. But except for those two conditions, Ambassador Bruce will be free to negotiate in a very flexible manner on our proposals or on theirs
THE PRESIDENT. A very significant justification. It isn't just a case of seeing that the Americans are moved out in an orderly way. If that were the case, we could move them out more quickly, but it is a case of moving American forces out in a way that we can at the same time win a just peace. 
Now, by winning a just peace, what I mean is not victory over North Vietnam-we are not asking for that-but it is simply theright of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future without having us impose our will upon them, or the North Vietnamese, or anybody else outside impose their will upon them. 
When we look at that limited objective, I am sure some would say, "Well, is that really worth it? Is that worth the efforts of all these Americans fighting in Vietnam, the lives that have been lost?" 
I suppose it could be said that simply saving 17 million people in South Vietnam from a Communist takeover isn't worth the efforts of the United States. But let's go further. If the United States, after all of this effort, if we were to withdraw immediately, as many Americans would want us to do-and it would be very easy for me to do it and simply blame it on the previous administration but if we were to do that, I would probably survive through my term, but it would have, in my view, a catastrophic effect on this country and the cause of peace in the years ahead. Now I know them are those who say the domino theory is obsolete. They haven't talked to the dominoes. They should talk to the Thais, to the Malaysians, to the Singaporans, to the Indonesians, to the Filipinos, to the Japanese, and the rest. And if the United States leaves Vietnam in a way that we are humiliated or defeated, not simply speaking in what is called jingoistic terms, but in very practical terms, this will be immensely discouraging to the 300 million people from Japan clear around to Thailand in free Asia; and even more important it will be ominously encouraging to the leaders of Communist China and the Soviet Union who are supporting the North Vietnamese. It will encourage them in their expansionist policies in other areas. 
The world will be much safer in which to live
Let me put it another way: I do not think it would be in the interest of the United States and those who want peace in the Pacific if that part of the world should become Communist, because then the peace of the world, the peace in the Pacific, would be in my opinion very greatly jeopardized if the Communists were to go through that area. 
However, referring now specifically to what we are doing in Vietnam, our aim there is a very limited one, and it is to provide for the South Vietnamese theright of self-determination. I believe that when they exercise that right they will choose a non-Communist government. But we are indicating--and incidentally, despite what everybody says about the present government in South Vietnam, its inadequacies and the rest, we have to give them credit for the fact that they also have indicated that they will accept the result of an election, what the people choose. 
Let us note the fact that the North Vietnamese are in power not as a result of an election, and have refused to indicate that they will accept the result of an election in South Vietnam, which would seem to me to be a pretty good bargaining point on our side. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Chancellor, it depends upon the people of South Vietnam. If the people of South Vietnam after they see what the Vietcong, the Communist Vietcong, have done to the villages they have occupied, the 40,000 people that they have murdered, village chiefs and others, the atrocities of Hue--if the people of South Vietnam, of which 850,000 of them are Catholic refugees from North Vietnam, after a blood bath there when the North Vietnamese took over in North Vietnam---if the people of South Vietnam under those circumstances should choose to move in the direction of a Communist government, that, of course, is their right. I do not think it will happen. But I do emphasize that the American position and the position also of the present Government of South Vietnam, it seems to me, is especially strong, because we are confident enough that we say to the enemy, "All right, we'll put our case to the people and we'll accept the result." If it happens to be what you describe, a Yugoslav type of government or a mixed government, we will accept it. 
THE PRESIDENT. The point that you make, Mr. Chancellor, is one that we in the free world face every place in the world, and it is really what distinguishes us from the Communist world. 
Again, I know that what is called cold war rhetoric isn't fashionable these days, and I am not engaging in it because I am quite practical, and we must be quite practical, about the world in which we live with all the dangers that we have in the Mideast and other areas that I am sure we will be discussing later in this program. 
But let us understand that we in the free world have to live or die by the proposition that the people have a right to choose. 
Let it also be noted that in no country in the world today in which the Communists are in power have they come to power as a result of the people choosing them--not in North Vietnam, not in North Korea, not in China, not in Russia, and not in any one of the countries of Eastern Europe, and not in Cuba. In every case, communism has come to power by other than a free election, so I think we are in a pretty safe position on this particular point. 
I think you are therefore putting, and I don't say this critically, what is really a hypothetical question. It could happen. But if it does happen that way we must assume the consequences, and if the people of South Vietnam should choose a Communist government, then we will have to accept the consequences of what would happen as far as the domino theory in the other areas. 
THE PRESIDENT. We would have to live with it, and I would also suggest this: When we talk about the dominoes, I am not saying that automatically if South Vietnam should go the others topple one by one. I am only saying that in talking to every one of the Asian leaders, and I have talked to all of them. I have talked to Lee Kuan Yew--all of you know him from Singapore of course--and to the Tunku 2 from Malaysia, the little countries, and to Suharto from Indonesia, and of course to Thanom and Thanat Khoman, the two major leaders in Thailand--I have talked to all of these leaders and every one of them to a man recognizes, and Sato of Japan recognizes, and of course the Koreans recognize that if the Communists succeed, not as a result of a free election-they are not thinking of that but if they succeed as a result of exporting aggression and supporting it in toppling the government, then the message to them is, "Watch out, we might be next." 
That's what is real. So, if they come in as a result of a free election, and I don't think that is going to happen, the domino effect would not be as great
Now what they are doing in South Vietnam, and I checked this just before the program tonight as to the numbers, there are approximately 40,00 North Vietnamese in Cambodia at the present time. There are approximately 8,000 South Vietnamese. What they are doing is cleaning out some of the sanctuary areas that were not completed when we left. 
They are not building substantial bases. What they are really doing is simply providing the basis on which they can stop the North Vietnamese from coming back into the sanctuary areas, and I think that is their responsibility and their right
I will say it is decisive in a couple of other ways. It does make it possible for us to go ahead with assurance on our withdrawal program of 150,000 more, which will be completed during the spring of next year; and it does give us more assurance that the South Vietnamese now, for the first time tested in battle by themselves against the North Vietnamese, can handle themselves, that Vietnamization can work and will work, and that we can get out, and they can stay in and hold their own

In terms of South Vietnam, I think we could put it, however, in another way. We are prepared by negotiation to bring out all of our forces and have no forces at all in South Vietnam if the enemy will negotiate, if they will withdraw theirs. 
We are confident that the South Vietnamese can defend themselves if there is a mutual withdrawal of outside forces. 
Now, if they do not agree to it, then we still have a plan which, as for its Ions-term goal, is to withdraw all of our forces. However, it will be in stages. 
As you know, what we are withdrawing now are primarily our ground combat forces, and the majority of our ground combat forces will be out during the spring of next year. The 265,000 will--that number, of course, will be a majority of our ground combat forces. 
Now, when it comes to naval forces and air forces which require more sophisticated training and the rest, it will take a longer time to get them out, but I again come back to this proposition: Our long-term goal is to get them all out; and short-term, if the enemy is willing to negotiate with our new Ambassador, we will get them all out within a year, if they are willing to negotiate.
THE PRESIDENT. I think that the argument that if we just set a terminal date as to when we are going to get out that this might, in reverse, encourage them to negotiate--I don't think it will stand up. I think it is a good debating point to make and perhaps we could say that the debating point we have made on the other side is just that, but I don't believe it is. 
Let me put it this way: Put yourself in the position of the enemy. Also, put yourself in the position of an historian--and all of you are historians; you study these matters and you write about them, you think about them, and you commentate upon them. You will generally find that negotiations occur, negotiations which end war, only when the balance of power changes significantly, only when one party or the other concludes that as a result of the shift in the military balance they no longer have an opportunity to accomplish their goal militarily and therefore, they had best negotiate. 
Now, I think one of the positive benefits of the Cambodian operation is that it has changed the military balance. How much it has changed in the minds of the enemy remains to be seen. 
I do not say it has changed it enough so that they will negotiate. I think it might help. Only time will tell. But putting myself---again, looking at the enemy, I am convinced that if we were to tell the enemy now, the North Vietnamese, that within, as for example the McGovern-Hatfield resolution, that by the end of this year all Americans will be gone, well, I can assure you that the enemy isn't going to negotiate in Paris at all. They are not going to talk. They are going to wait until we get out because they know that at the end of this year the South Vietnamese won't be ready to defend the country by themselves. 
But if, on the other hand, the enemy feels that we are going to stay there long enough for the South Vietnamese to be strong enough to handle their own defense, then I think they have a real incentive to negotiate, because if they have to negotiate with a strong, vigorous South Vietnamese Government, the deal they can make with them isn't going to be as good as the deal they might make now. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Smith, when we talk about reescalating the fighting, I think we have to be precise about what we mean. First, I have already indicated in answer to Mr. Sevareid's first question that we have no plans to go back into Cambodia. 
And, incidentally, I am not as bearish as some commentators have been about the future of Cambodia. If I could digress a moment, I think this is a question that our listeners would be interested in-Cambodia's chances of surviving as a neutral country are infinitely better now than they were on April 30th. And they are better, first, because the North Vietnamese have a 600-mile supply line rather than a 40-mile supply line back to the sanctuaries which we have destroyed. 
They are better, also, because the Cambodian Government has far more support among the people, and the reporters from Phnom Penh have generally reported that. They are better, too, because the Cambodian Government also has support from the 11 Asian nations, representing 300 million people, and I think also they are better for the reason that the South Vietnamese have been very effective when they have taken on the North Vietnamese in the Cambodian area. 
They have posed a rather considerable threat to them. I do not suggest that it is still not a fragile situation. It is difficult. But it is possible for them to survive. 
Now coming back to your question, first, when you talk about reescalation, we do not plan to go back into Cambodia. We do plan, however, and I will use this power--I am going to use, as I should, the air power of the United States to interdict all flows of men and supplies which I consider are directed toward South Vietnam. 
That is in my role of defending American men. Now let's look at the other possibilities of the escalation. For example, we have a bombing pause in the north, as you note. As you also note, one of what was called the understanding when that bombing pause was entered into was that American reconnaissance flights could take place over North Vietnam so that we could determine whether or not they were planning a new attack, and those reconnaissance flights were supposed to be immune from attack. 
Now, consistently the North Vietnamese have been shooting at those planes. In fact at the time we embarked on the April 30th operation, I ordered some attacks on some sites in North Vietnam which had been shooting our planes. 
If those attacks should now develop again, I will, of course, use our American air power against North Vietnam sites that attack our planes. 
That is my responsibility, to defend American boys American men or boys when they do come under attack. 
Now when you talk about reescalation in other terms, I do not see that presently as a possibility, presently in terms of what the North Vietnamese may be able to do and what we would do in action to it. 
But I want to leave no doubt on one score: I am concerned, as all of you gentlemen have been concerned, about the dissent on the campuses, and among a great many thoughtful Americans that are for peace, as I am sure all of you are, and as I am. Sometimes people say, "Well, was it really worth it?" Right after I made this report, one of the members of the press said, "Do you think it was all worth it?" 
And my answer quite candidly is this: There are no easy choices in the position I hold, as you well know, particularly when it is one like this. I knew there was a risk, the risk of dissent, and I knew that a barrage of criticism would come not only from the campus but from many others as well. 
So I had to weigh that risk. I had to weigh the risk of dissent from those who would object if I did act, against the risks to 435,000 American lives who would be in jeopardy if I did not act, and as Commander in Chief, I had no choice but to act to defend those men. And as Commander in Chief, if I am faced with that decision again, I will exercise that power to defend those men. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Chancellor, the hypothetical question that you have posed shows, it seems to me, very clearly why as Commander in Chief I had no choice but to move in the sanctuary areas. Just think what the situation would be that we would confront if the Communists were to take Cambodia and if they had--they, rather than we--had the 14 million rounds of small ammunition and the 190,000 rounds of mortars and recoilless rifles, and all the rest. It would mean that the position that we would be in, and our troops would be in, would be extremely difficult and more difficult than was previously the case, because they not only would have the sanctuaries but they would have the back country to back it up and they would also have the port of Sihanoukville open, and over 50 percent of the material in the sanctuaries came in through that port. 
Now you come to the second point. Now that we have cleaned out the sanctuaries, let us suppose--and what you are putting is a hypothetical question and a hypothesis I do notaccept, although it is a possibility because nobody can be sure, it is a fragile situation--if the Communists despite the support that the present government in Cambodia gets for its neutrality, if they should nevertheless topple it, what do we do? The answer is that we continue in our course in South Vietnam to defeat the enemy there, and the South Vietnamese, who are now a very formidable fighting force, will certainly see to it that the sanctuary areas are not again occupied. That is a very real threat to whatever Communist activities might be engaged in in Phnom Penh
Now, the second point that I would make is that if the United States, after this long struggle in Vietnam, if we do what Mr. Ball and some others apparently want us to do--just get out, without regard to the consequences--I do not see the American people and the American Congress then saying that if we couldn't do what was necessary where the lives of American men were involved in Vietnam, that we will do what is necessary because we are concerned about Israel or some other state in the Mideast. 
You cannot separate what happens to America in Vietnam from the Mideast or from Europe or any place else. That is why European leaders--some of them don't say it publicly, but privately they all know how much rides on the United States coming out of Vietnam, not with a victory over North Vietnam, but with a just peace, because if the United States is humiliated or defeated in Vietnam, the effect on the United States is what I am concerned about, the people of the United States. And I think we'll see a rampant isolationism in this country in which we will not do what we should do in other parts of the world





227 - The President's News Conference
July 20, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I, of course, wouldn't tell you what the new instructions were because Ambassador Bruce, as the negotiator, must reflect those instructions at a time and in a way that he thinks would be helpful to negotiations. 
I will only say at this time that we are giving Ambassador Bruce great latitude to discuss all of the proposals that we have made both in public and in private sessions to the North Vietnamese and the VC, in addition, to discuss the proposals they have made and also to recommend to us any new approaches that he believes might be helpful in pursuing the negotiations. 
With regard to the specific matters that Ambassador Bruce will discuss, these are subjects we are planning to take up in our meeting with him and Ambassador Bunker tomorrow, but we would not, in advance of the negotiation---of course, it would not be helpful to his negotiating position to indicate what he was going to do
THE PRESIDENT. No, not at all. The South Vietnamese Government has been very cooperative. They have agreed to free elections. They have agreed to accept the mandate of free elections, something which the Government of North Vietnam, of course, has never agreed to in North Vietnam. They have agreed to discuss and negotiate cease-fires on a national basis. And as far as this talk about coalition government is concerned, I want to be quite categorical. I have always said that in South Vietnam we will negotiate without conditions except with regard to one condition: and that is theright of the people of South Vietnam to determine their future. 
Imposing a coalition government upon them, one which they had not chosen themselves, would be in violation of that principle. That we will notaccept. But this is not a case of South Vietnam vetoing our initiatives. 
THE PRESIDENT. I have read his statements in context of the general proposals that he and his government have made, along with the proposals we have made in the Paris talks. And those proposals have indicated that all political parties in South Vietnam could participate in the political process. And I do not understand that President Thieu has departed from that proposition




240 - The President's News Conference
July 30, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. The problem of those who are held prisoner in North Vietnam is one of enormous concern to us. It was discussed not only when Ambassador Bruce was in Vietnam, but also when he met with us in Washington, with Secretary Rogers, Dr. Kissinger, and others, and got his new instructions. 
I can assure you that it will be very high on his agenda when he goes to Paris. I cannot promise and I would not want to hold out any false hope to those who are the dependents and those who are the wives and children of those who are prisoners, but we certainly are going to keep this very much high on the agenda and work toward a solution of it in any peace settlement, if we can get one.



330 - Remarks to Reporters Announcing a Major Statement on Peace Initiatives in Southeast Asia.
October 6, 1970

Finally, I would like to indicate that we do not consider this to be a propaganda gimmick. We are not saying it simply for the record. An indication of our attitude in that respect is that I have instructed Ambassador Bruce to lay this proposal on the table at the Paris conference on Thursday morning when he meets with the negotiators from North Vietnam and the Vietcong



335 - Address to the Nation About a New Initiative for Peace in Southeast Asia.
October 7, 1970

When I authorized operations against the enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia last April, I also directed that an intensive effort be launched to develop new approaches for peace in Indochina. 
In Ireland on Sunday, I met with the chiefs of our delegation to the Paris talks. This meeting marked the culmination of a Government-wide effort begun last spring on the negotiation front. After considering the recommendations of all my principal advisers, I am tonight announcing new proposals for peace in Indochina. 
This new peace initiative has been discussed with the Governments of South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. All support it. It has been made possible in large part by the remarkable success of the Vietnamization program over the past 18 months. Tonight I want to tell you what these proposals are and what they mean. 
First, I propose that all armed forces throughout Indochina cease firing their weapons and remain in the positions they now hold. This would be a "cease-fire-in-place." It would not in itself be an end to the conflict, but it would accomplish one goal all of us have been working toward: an end to the killing. 
I do not minimize the difficulty of maintaining a cease-fire in a guerrilla war where there are no front lines. But an unconventional war may require an unconventional truce; our side is ready to stand still and cease firing. 
I ask that this proposal for a cease-fire-in-place be the subject for immediate negotiation. And my hope is that it will break the logjam in all the negotiations. 
This cease-fire proposal is put forth without preconditions. The general principles that should apply are these: 
A cease-fire must be effectively supervised by international observers, as well as by the parties themselves. Without effective supervision a cease-fire runs the constant risk of breaking down. All concerned must be confident that the cease-fire will be maintained and that any local breaches of it will be quickly and fairly repaired. 
A cease-fire should not be the means by which either side builds up its strength by an increase in outside combat forces in any of the nations of Indochina. 
And a cease-fire should cause all kinds of warfare to stop. This covers the full range of actions that have typified this war, including bombing and acts of terror. 
A cease-fire should encompass not only the fighting in Vietnam but in all of Indochina. Conflicts in this region are closely related. The United States has never sought to widen the war. What we do seek is to widen the peace. 
Finally, a cease-fire should be part of a general move to end the war in Indochina. 
A cease-fire-in-place would undoubtedly create a host of problems in its maintenance. But it's always been easier to make war than to make a truce. To build an honorable peace, we must accept the challenge of long and difficult negotiations. 
By agreeing to stop the shooting, we can set the stage for agreements on other matters. 
A second point of the new initiative for peace is this: 
I propose an Indochina Peace Conference. At the Paris talks today, we are talking about Vietnam. But North Vietnamese troops are not only infiltrating, crossing borders, and establishing bases in South Vietnam--they are carrying on their aggression in Laos and Cambodia as well. 
An international conference is needed to deal with the conflict in all three states of Indochina. The war in Indochina has been proved to be of one piece; it cannot be cured by treating only one of its areas of outbreak. 
The essential elements of the Geneva Accords of 1954 and 1962 remain valid as a basis for settlement of problems between states in the Indochina area. And we shall accept the results of agreements reached between these states. 
While we pursue the convening of an Indochina Peace Conference, we will continue the negotiations in Paris. Our proposal for a larger conference can be discussed there as well as through other diplomatic channels. The Paris talks will remain our primary forum for reaching a negotiated settlement, until such time as a broader international conference produces serious negotiations. 
The third part of our peace initiative has to do with the United States forces in South Vietnam. 
In the past 20 months, I have reduced our troop ceilings in South Vietnam by 165,000 men. During the spring of next year, these withdrawals will have totaled more than 260,000 men--about one-half the number that were in South Vietnam when I took office. 
As the American combat role and presence have decreased, American casualties have also decreased. Our casualties since the completion of the Cambodian operation were the lowest for a comparable period in the last 4 ? years.
We are ready now to negotiate an agreed timetable for complete withdrawals as part of an overall settlement. We are prepared to withdraw all our forces as part of a settlement based on the principles I spelled out previously and the proposals I am making tonight. 
Fourth, I ask the other side to join us in a search for a political settlement that truly meets the aspirations of all South Vietnamese. 
Three principles govern our approach:
--We seek a political solution that reflects the will of the South Vietnamese people.
--A fair political solution should reflect the existing relationship of political forces in South Vietnam.
--And we will abide by the outcome of the political process agreed upon. 
Let there be no mistake about one essential point: The other side is not merely objecting to a few personalities in the South Vietnamese Government. They want to dismantle the organized non-Communist parties and insure the takeover by their party. They demand theright to exclude whomever they wish from government. 
This patently unreasonable demand is totally unacceptable. 
As my proposals today indicate, we are prepared to be flexible on many matters. But we stand firm for the fight of all the South Vietnamese people to determine for themselves the kind of government they want. 
We have no intention of seeking any settlement at the conference table other than one which fairly meets the reasonable concerns of both sides. We know that when the conflict ends, the other side will still be there. And the only kind of settlement that will endure is one that both sides have an interest in preserving. 
Finally, I propose the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of war held by both sides. 
War and imprisonment should be over for all these prisoners. They and their families have already suffered too much. 
I propose that all prisoners of war, without exception, without condition, be released now to return to the place of their choice.
And I propose that all journalists and other innocent civilian victims of the conflict be released immediately as well. 
The immediate release of all prisoners of war would be a simple act of humanity. 
But it could be even more. It could serve to establish good faith, the intent to make progress, and thus improve the prospects for negotiation. 
We are prepared to discuss specific procedures to complete the speedy release of all prisoners. 
The five proposals that I have made tonight can open the door to an enduring peace in Indochina. 
Ambassador Bruce will present these proposals formally to the other side in Pads tomorrow. He will be joined in that presentation by Ambassador Lam 1 representing South Vietnam. 
1 Ambassador Pham Dang Lam, Head of the Republic of Vietnam delegation to the Paris talks on Vietnam. 
Let us consider for a moment what the acceptance of these proposals would mean. 
Since the end of World War II, there's always been a war going on somewhere in the world. The guns have never stopped firing. By achieving a cease-fire in Indochina, and by holding firmly to the cease-fire in the Middle East, we could hear the welcome sound of peace throughout the world for the first time in a generation. 
We could have some reason to hope that we had reached the beginning of the end of war in this century. We might then be on the threshold of a generation of peace. 
The proposals I have made tonight are designed to end the fighting throughout Indochina and to end the impasse in negotiations in Paris. Nobody has anything to gain by delay and only lives to lose. 
There are many nations involved in the fighting in Indochina. Tonight, all those nations, except one, announce their readiness to agree to a cease-fire. The time has come for the Government of North Vietnam to join its neighbors in a proposal to quit making war and to start making peace. 
There is no goal to which this Nation is more dedicated and to which I am more dedicated than to build a new structure of peace in the world where every nation, including North Vietnam as well as South Vietnam, can be free and independent with no fear of foreign aggression or foreign domination. 
It is in that spirit that I make this proposal for a just peace in Vietnam and in Indochina. 
I ask that the leaders in Hanoi respond to this proposal in the same spirit. Let us give our children what we have not had in this century, a chance to enjoy a generation of peace




336 - Reply to Reporter About Reaction to Address on Southeast Asia
October 8, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. The rest of the world, yes. The North Vietnamese, I think, made a brief comment this morning, indicating that they, of course, will look at the [proposal] next week. 
We don't expect a formal comment from them until next week when they come back to the Paris conference. But the rest, the reaction in the world and in the Nation, has been extremely favorable. 
We are particularly pleased, naturally, at the strong support within the Nation, the bipartisan support, because one of the hopes that the North Vietnamese have had is that by division in the United States they will get what they want at the conference table and a better deal than they could get now. 
We have made a very forthcoming proposal, and the fact that it has wide bipartisan support will not go unnoticed in Hanoi. I appreciate the fact that our Democratic leaders like Mike Mansfield, as well as Republican leaders, have endorsed it, and Congressmen and Senators of both sides. It was a bipartisan speech. There was no partisanship in it. When people are working for peace, there's no politics in that. 
No one now can raise a question on that. Well, they can raise a question, but serious questions will not be raised because whether it is a cease-fire or a total withdrawal of all of our forces, or whether it is a political settlement, or the offer with regard to prisoners of war, the United States has made a very forthcoming proposal. We would expect that the North Vietnamese, after their first, shall we say, reaction indicating that they do not see much new in it--which we would naturally expect at first blush---that as they consider it we would hope that they would take it as seriously as we took it when we made it, as world leaders have responded to it, as leaders in both parties here have responded to it, including critics of the Vietnam war, as well as those who support it




337 - Replies to Reporters' Questions About Reaction to Address on Southeast Asia
October 8, 1970

The immediate reaction in Hanoi, of course, is no indication of what their reaction will be later. The immediate reaction always has to be one of what appears to be rejection in such a case. 
But if the situation continues as we think it will, of broad world support for the peace initiative, and broad support within the United States, I believe that Hanoi will recognize that this is a very serious proposal. It is one that is fair to them and fair to us, and it is one that they should seriously consider rather than simply to repeat the same old lines that they have repeated previously. 
We have made some new proposals and now we think that they have the opportunity to make some new proposals. If they do, we can make some progress. That is the way we are going to play it. 
We didn't make this simply to have a propaganda line, as I pointed out. We made this proposal because we wanted to cover every base that we could. And so, that is why we offered the cease-fire, a total cease-fire. That is why we offered a total withdrawal of all of our forces, something we have never offered before, if we had mutual withdrawal on the other side. That is why we had a very forthcoming position on the release of all prisoners without regard to trading one for one or two for one. We will release all we have; they will release all they have. That means not only we, but the South Vietnamese as well--and an all-Indochina conference. 
And while we indicated, too, that we were flexible on these matters, it seems under these circumstances that this is now the chance, the time, to make some progress at the peace table. 
Next week we will get the official response from Hanoi in the public session and we would hope that it would indicate some progress. But whether it does or it does not we intend to continue to press this. It takes a long time to get a peace proposal like this, after a long war, on the tracks, to get progress on it. 
We are not going to be discouraged by rejections. We are not going to be discouraged by attitudes that we would expect. Because we feel so strongly that this is a fair proposal we are going to continue to press it in every world forum, in Paris, and, of course, in the event that the opportunity is presented, to the North Vietnamese and other channels



351 - Remarks on Arrival at Burlington, Vermont.
October 17, 1970

And third, my friends, we have presented to the North Vietnamese, over national television--and I am sure many of you heard it--a far-reaching peace plan. We have offered a cease-fire without conditions. We have offered to negotiate all the political settlements with regard to South Vietnam, one that would allow all those in that country to participate in the making of that settlement. We have offered also a plan that would provide for the release of war prisoners on both sides. We have offered a conference on all of Indochina. 
Now let me tell you exactly where it stands today. As I stand before you today, I can say confidently the war in Vietnam is coming to an end, and we are going to win a just peace in Vietnam. It will come to an end either--if the enemy accepts our proposal for a cease-fire, it can come to an end more quickly. 
If it does notaccept that proposal, then we will bring it to an end by continuing to withdraw Americans and replacing them with Vietnamese and allowing the Vietnamese to have theright to choose their own government without having it imposed by North Vietnam or by the United States. Now, isn't that the fair thing to do?
Now let us see what the other side of the argument is. I know the people in this State. My good friend Consuelo Bailey, 3 who has always advised me about Vermont, she has said to me from time to time, "The people up in this State, they want to hear both sides of the argument and want to make up their minds." 
3 Consuelo Northrop Bailey, National Republican Committeewoman for Vermont and Secretary of the Republican National Committee. 
Let me tell you the other side. I know there are people who say: Why this long road? Why don't we just end the war? I could have done it the day I came into office.
I could have brought all the Americans home. Let me tell you ending a war isn't very difficult. We ended World War I. We ended World War II. We ended Korea. And yet, in this century we have not had a generation of peace. 
My friends, what we want to do is to end the war so that the young people that are shouting "Stop the War" will have a generation of peace, and that is the kind of plan that we are trying to implement. So that is what we are doing. 
We are ending the war in a way that will discourage those who might start a war. 
We are ending the war in a way that will bring permanent peace in the Pacific. It is that kind of program that Win Prouty has stood firmly by. 
So I say let us work for what all of us want, not just peace for the next election but peace for the next generation so that the younger brothers and the sons of those who have fought in Vietnam won't have to be fighting in some other Vietnam sometime in the future




368 - Remarks in Kansas City, Missouri.
October 19, 1970

And instead of the United States standing there without any kind of a peace plan, we have offered, as you have heard on television 2 weeks ago, a peace plan which offers a cease-fire without any conditions, a peace plan which offers to negotiate a political settlement, a peace plan which offers to have a conference with regard to all of Indochina so that we can withdraw all foreign forces from that area--and further, a peace plan which would do something that ought to have been done long ago. Even though we have far more of their prisoners than they have of ours, we say let's release the prisoners. 
I think that this is the kind of a plan that is fair and it is certainly one that Americans can proudly stand on. 
Now, my friends, I can tell you we are on the road to ending this war. We will end it, if necessary, through continuing the process of replacing Americans with South Vietnamese, a longer road; or we will end it, if we can, through negotiation if the North Vietnamese are willing to accept our offer to negotiate. 
But the important thing for us to bear in mind is how and why we must bring this war to a conclusion in the fight way. 
Before we came into this hall tonight, I saw, as you saw--and as a matter of fact they were rather loud, I could hear them on the top floor of the Muehlebach [Hotel]--a few people who were saying, a few hundred, I understood this, who were saying, "End the war." They were saying it in words a little more expressive than that, but they were saying end the war-now. End it now. 
Let me ask you something: You all know that the President of the United States as Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces could have ended the war the day that I came in. But my friends, ending the war isn't the problem. We ended World War I. We ended World War II. We ended the Korean war. And I say this particularly to these young people sitting down here and who are scattered all through this audience. Even though we have ended three wars in this century, we have yet to have a generation of peace. What we want to do is to end this war in a way that will discourage aggression and reduce the chances of another war. Let's have a full generation of peace for America. 
That is what we are doing in Vietnam. That is why we have also worked out a cease-fire in the Mideast. That is why we have kept the strength and are keeping the strength of America up, but are indicating our willingness to negotiate with the Soviet Union to limit nuclear arms. 
The UnitedStatescommitment to peace is unquestioned. But let us remember, it is important if we are going to have a peace, not just peace for the next election but peace for the next generation, that the United States be strong and not weak unless we get a mutual reduction on the part of our strength and on the other side as well. 
And so, my friends, I say to you on this great issue, the issue of peace, we stand for peace. We are ending the war. We are going to have a just peace. One that will bring peace in the Pacific and will increase the chances for peace in the world. And we need help, support in the United States Senate for that kind of responsible policy. We can get that kind of support from a man like Jack Danforth



441 - Remarks on Presenting Medals to Members of a Search and Rescue Mission to Sontay, Vietnam.
November 25, 1970

Theirs was a mission of mercy, an attempt to rescue some of their fellow Americans who were being held captive in North Vietnam under the most barbaric conditions

What these men have done is a message, a message to the prisoners of war still in North Vietnam, to their wives and their loved ones, some of whom are here, that the prisoners of war have not been forgotten and that we will continue to do everything we can at the diplomatic table and in other ways to attempt to bring them back home



454 - The President's News Conference
December 10, 1970

THE PRESIDENT. Let me answer the second part of the question first. We are prepared to have cease-fires on a limited basis over the holiday seasons. As you know, the North Vietnamese have turned down any extended cease-fire over the holiday season out of hand. We, of course, could not have any extended cease-fire unilaterally, because that would be very dangerous for our forces. 
If it's a brief cease-fire, we will do it; if it's extended, we will not. 
With regard to the second part of your question, the bombing of North Vietnam, you may recall that a few weeks ago there was bombing of installations in North Vietnam after the North Vietnamese had fired on some of our unarmed reconnaissance planes. 
Now, there's been, I note, some speculation in the press, and also some charges from North Vietnam, that there is no understanding that reconnaissance planes are to fly over North Vietnam since the bombing halt was announced. 
I want to be very sure that that understanding is clear. First, President Johnson said there was such an understanding at the time of the bombing halt; Secretary Clifford did, and Ambassador Vance1 did. 
But if there is any misunderstanding, I want to indicate the understanding of this President with regard to the flying of reconnaissance planes over North Vietnam: I must insist that there be continued reconnaissance over North Vietnam because, as we are withdrawing our forces, I have to see whether or not there is any chance of a strike against those forces that remain, and we have to watch for the buildup. 
If our planes are fired upon, I will not only order that they return the fire, but I will order that the missile site be destroyed and that the military complex around that site which supports it also be destroyed by bombing. That is my understanding. 
Beyond that, there is another understanding with regard to the bombing of North Vietnam which at a number of these press conferences and in my speech on November 3d [1969] and in four televised speeches to the Nation last year, I have stated. I restate it again tonight. At a time when we are withdrawing from South Vietnam, it is vitally important that the President of the United States, as Commander in Chief, take the action that is necessary to protect our remaining forces, because the number of our ground combat forces is going down very, very steadily. 
Now if, as a result of my conclusion that the North Vietnamese, by their infiltration, threaten our remaining forces, if they thereby develop a capacity and proceed possibly to use that capacity to increase the level of fighting in South Vietnam, then I will order the bombing of military sites in North Vietnam, the passes that lead from North Vietnam into South Vietnam, the military complexes, the military supply lines. That will be the reaction that I shall take. 
I trust that that is not necessary. But let there be no misunderstanding with regard to this President's understanding about either reconnaissance flights or about a step-up of the activities.
THE PRESIDENT. Not at all. We are continuing those talks. As you note today Ambassador Bruce made an offer which refined the offer we had made earlier of a complete exchange of all prisoners of war. 
He offered to exchange on the part of both the United States and South Vietnam 8,200 North Vietnamese that we have prisoner for approximately 800 Americans and other allied prisoners that they have. That is a 10 to 1 ratio, but we are willing to do that. 
Their failure to accept that offer will pinpoint something that is pretty generally getting known around the world, and that is that this nation is an international outlaw, that it does not adhere to the rules of international conduct. 
But we are going to continue the negotiations as long as they are willing to negotiate and as long as there is some hope to make progress on the prisoner issue or on a cease-fire and an earlier end to the war than the Vietnamization process will inevitably bring
The Cambodians, a people, 7 million only, neutralists previously, untrained, are tying down 40,000 trained North Vietnamese regulars. If those North Vietnamese weren't in Cambodia, they'd be over killing Americans. That investment of $250 million in small arms of aid to Cambodia so that they can defend themselves against a foreign aggressor--this is no civil war, it has no aspect of a civil war--the dollars we send to Cambodia saves American lives and enables us to bring Americans home. And I only hope the Congress approves it




6 - "A Conversation With the President," Interview With Four Representatives of the Television Networks
January 4, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Chancellor, I have no desire to resume the bombing of North Vietnam. We do not want to go back to the bombing of the strategic targets in North Vietnam, and we do not want even to bomb military targets unless it becomes necessary to do so--and this is the key point--to protect American forces. 
Now, with regard to the understanding, let us see what it is. 
First, there was an understanding. President Johnson said so, Dean Rusk said so, Clark Clifford said so, Mr. Harriman 4 said so. There was an understanding that after the bombing halt, that unarmed reconnaissance planes could fly over North Vietnam with impunity. We had to insist on that, because otherwise we would have no intelligence with regard to what they were planning on an attack. 
So, when they fire on those planes I have given instructions that we will take out the SAM [surface-to-air missile] site or whatever it is that has fired upon them. 
We will continue to do so; and if they say there is no understanding in that respect, then there are no restraints whatever on us, and so we must have that in mind. 
Now, the other understanding is one that I have laid down. It is a new one. It is a new one which goes along with our Vietnamization program and our withdrawal program. I pointed out a moment ago what has happened in Vietnam, the fact that our casualties are a third of what they were 2 years ago, the fact that we have 265,000 out of Vietnam now, and that we now can see the end of the American combat role in Vietnam. We can see that coming. 
We must realize, however, as Secretary Rogers pointed out in his news conference at the State Department a few days ago, that in May of this year most American combat forces, ground combat forces, will have been withdrawn from Vietnam. But there will still be 280,000 there left to withdraw. 
Now, the President of the United States, as Commander in Chief, owes a responsibility to those men to see that they are not subjected to an overwhelming attack from the North. That is why we must continue reconnaissance, and that is why also, if the enemy at a time we are trying to deescalate, at a time we are withdrawing, starts to build up its infiltration, starts moving troops and supplies through the Mu Gia Pass and the other passes, then I, as Commander in Chief, will have to order bombing strikes on those key areas. 
That was one of the reasons for this strike, and it will be done again if they continue to threaten our remaining forces in Vietnam. But only on those military targets, and only if necessary. 
THE PRESIDENT. It has been made clear only since we began our withdrawal program. You see, this is a new policy. 
THE PRESIDENT. I made it clear not just a month ago, but in November--you may recall that on November 3, when I made nay speech on November 3, 5 I warned the North Vietnamese then that if at a time we were withdrawing they stepped up their infiltration and threatened our remaining forces, that I would retaliate. 
I have said that on eight different occasions on national television and national radio. I have said it also in other messages to them that have gotten to them very loud and very clear. So there is no question about the understanding, and that was why we did this. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Smith, our Vietnamization policy has been very carefully drawn up, and we are withdrawing in a measured way on the basis that the South Vietnamese will be able to defend themselves as we withdraw, and it is working. For example, did you realize that-I am sure you do because I think it was reported on your network---all of our naval forces now, combat forces, have been removed? 
The South Vietnamese Navy has taken over. And so it will be in these other areas. When the time comes in 1972 that you speak of, it is possible, of course, that at that time North Vietnam might launch an attack, but I am convinced that at that time, based on the training program of the South Vietnamese, based on the watershed that occurred when they jelled and became a fighting, confident unit after the Cambodian intervention, I am convinced that they will be able to hold their own and defend themselves in 1972. 
Now, that doesn't answer your hypothetical question, but I am simply not going to borrow trouble by saying that I expect them to fail. I don't think they will




59 - Remarks on Receiving the American Legion's Distinguished Service Medal for 1969.
February 16, 1971

Now we are fortunate as we meet here tonight to be at a time when we can look at this very difficult war in Vietnam, when we can see that Americans are continuing to come home, when we can see the end of the American involvement in Vietnam; but an end of that involvement in a way that it will discourage that kind of war in the future and that it will allow the South Vietnamese to have the strength which they need to defend themselves and to give their people a chance to make their own choice with regard to the kind of government they want rather than to have that imposed upon them by force from the Communists in the North



61 - The President's News Conference
February 17, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I won't speculate on what South Vietnam may decide to do with regard to a possible incursion into North Vietnam in order to defend their national security. However, I will restate our policy. I stated that policy on November 3 [1969] and have restated it at least nine different times publicly since that time. 
I stated then that at a time we are withdrawing our forces, that if I found that the enemy was stepping up its activity through infiltration in a way that would threaten our remaining forces that I would take strong action to deal with the new situation. 
On December 10 [1970], as you recall, I reiterated that statement and said that this action would include the use of air power against the infiltration routes, military complex supply .depots. 
That is our policy, the policy of the President taking action if he finds that the North Vietnamese are undertaking actions which threaten our remaining forces in South Vietnam. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have indicated several limits. For example, we are not going to use ground forces in Laos. We are not going to use advisers in Laos with the South Vietnamese forces. We are not going to use ground forces in Cambodia or advisers in Cambodia as we have previously indicated, and we have no intention, of course, of using ground forces in North Vietnam. Those are limitations. 
THE PRESIDENT. I am not going to place any limitation upon the use of air power except, of course, to ruleout a rather ridiculous suggestion that is made from time to time--I think the latest by Hans Morgenthau 1--that our air power might include the use of tactical nuclear weapons. 
As you know, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News], this has been speculated on for a period of 5 years, and I have said for a period of 5 years that this is not an area where the use of nuclear weapons, in any form, is either needed or would be wise. 
As far as our air power is concerned, it will be directed against--and I ought to be as precise as I was on December 10--against those military activities which I determine are directed against, and thereby threaten, our remaining forces in South Vietnam
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. In looking at this situation, I recall, as probably some of you who were there, in 1965, that some of our military people, and civilians for that matter, were then saying that the way to stop the North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam was to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail. 
Laos would not have been possible had it not been for Cambodia. Cambodia cutting off one vital supply line and thereby practically bringing enemy activity in the southern half of South Vietnam to an end released the South Vietnamese forces--who, by this time, had not only gained confidence in Cambodia but also had additional strength--released them for undertaking what they could not have undertaken even 8 months ago: an incursion on their own into Laos with only U.S. air support. 
THE PRESIDENT. Let me refer to the situation as it presently exists rather than the hypothesis of whether the South Vietnamese might go into North Vietnam. 
As you know, the Communist Chinese have been operating in northern Laos for some time. But this action is not directed against Communist China. It is directed against the North Vietnamese who are pointed toward South Vietnam and toward Cambodia. 
Therefore, we expected the North Vietnamese to fight here. They have to fight here or give up the struggle to conquer South Vietnam, Cambodia, and their influence extending through other parts of Southeast Asia. 
THE PRESIDENT. By time, the operation will be limited to the time that is necessary to accomplish the objective. The objective is not to occupy any part of Laos. The South Vietnamese are not there to stay. They are there to disrupt the enemy's lines of communication, their supply lines, their infiltration routes, and then to get out. 
There is also another limitation in terms of time. And that is the weather. In the latter part of April or the early part of May, the rains come. And they would have to get out then because then the North Vietnamese also would pose no threat. 
In terms of area, space, it is limited to the specific area that you see on the maps here, in terms of cutting across the trails-and it is more than one trail, there are three or four trails--the trails that are the supply lines on which the North Vietnamese operate. 
THE PRESIDENT. As I have indicated, and as everyone I am sure would agree, as long as the North Vietnamese have any Americans as prisoners of war, there will be Americans in South Vietnam and enough Americans to give them an incentive to release the prisoners. 
THE PRESIDENT. Not needed, because you see, in my October [7, 1970] speech, as you will recall, I called for a cease-fire, I called for a political settlement, and I also called for a total withdrawal of all forces if it was mutual. So, the policy of this Government is for a total withdrawal, provided there is a withdrawal by the other side
The American action will be, according to the guideline I laid down a moment ago, the use of air power where I believe that North Vietnam's action may threaten our forces. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Potter [Philip Potter, Baltimore Sun], the matter of diplomatic initiatives is something that we have been discussing constantly within the Administration. As a matter of fact, I have been talking to the Secretary of State, and the Secretary of Defense, Dr. Kissinger, and others, both informally and in formal meetings. 
I have nothing to report today, but I do want to say this: that we will continue to pursue the diplomacy for a primary reason, the primary reason being to negotiate some settlement of the POW issue. 
We have to realize that as far as a negotiation affecting a political settlement for South Vietnam is concerned, time is runningout for the North Vietnamese if they expect to negotiate with the United States. Because as our forces come out of South Vietnam, it means that the responsibility for the negotiation, increasingly, then becomes that of South Vietnam. 
But I can only say that looking to the future, we constantly are reexamining the possibility of any diplomatic initiatives. However, I believe that what I stated in October is a very far-reaching, it is very comprehensive, it is a very fair proposal, and we stand on that at this time. 
I do not want to suggest that there are any more concessions coming from our side to North Vietnam. We are not going to make any more concessions. The time is for them to negotiate on the principles that we have laid down
THE PRESIDENT. My action in case that happened---and I do not believe it will happen--but my action will be guided by the same principles that I have laid down before. I would use the power of the United States, and particularly its power in the air, to the extent that I consider it necessary to protect our remaining forces in South Vietnam. 
We have a considerable number of forces, as you know, on the DMZ. The blocking forces along Route 9, before you get to the border of Laos, are primarily American. I will notallow those forces to be endangered by a massive North Vietnamese incursion, if one should be undertaken. I think the very fact that the North Vietnamese know that I intend to take strong action to deal with that incursion means that they are not going to take it. If they do, I can assure you that-I don't want to assure you, I simply want to have the record clear that I would not be bound, of course, by any so-called understandings, which they have already violated, at the time of the bombing halt
When you put it in terms of what would happen in the event the South Vietnamese went into North Vietnam, I am not going to speculate on what they will or will not do. I will only say that any American participation has to be approved here




73 - Radio Address About Second Annual Foreign Policy Report to the Congress.
February 25, 1971

We have kept ourcommitments as we have taken out our troops. South Vietnam now has an excellent opportunity not only to survive but to build a strong, free society. 
Thanks to the disruption of so much of the enemy's supplies, Americans are leaving South Vietnam in safety; we would much prefer to leave South Vietnam in peace. Negotiation remains the best and quickest way to end the war in a way that will not only end U.S. involvement and casualties but will mean an end to the fighting between North and South Vietnamese. 
On October 7, we made a proposal that could open the door to that kind of peace. We proposed:
--an immediate standstill cease-fire throughout Indochina to stop the fighting,
--an Indochina peace conference,
--the withdrawal of all outside forces,
--a political settlement fair to both sides,
--the immediate release of all prisoners of war. 
I reaffirm that proposal today. It is supported by every government in Indochina except one--the Government of North Vietnam. 
I once again urge Hanoi to join us in this search for peace. 
If North Vietnam wishes to negotiate with the United States, they will have to recognize that time is runningout. With the exception of the prisoners-of-war issue, if North Vietnam continues to refuse to discuss our peace proposals, they will soon find they have no choice but to negotiate only with the South Vietnamese. 
Our eventual goal is a total withdrawal of all outside forces. But as long as North Vietnam continues to hold a single American prisoner, we shall have forces in South Vietnam. The American prisoners of war will not be forgotten by their Government. 
I am keeping my pledge to end America's involvement in this war. But the main point I want to discuss with you today--and the main theme of my report to the Congress--is the future, not the past. It matters very much how we end this war.
To end a war is simple. 
But to end a war in a way that will not bring on another war is far from simple. 
In Southeast Asia today, aggression is failing--thanks to the determination of the South Vietnamese people and to the courage and sacrifice of America's fighting men. 
That brings us to a point that we have been at several times before in this century: aggression trained back, a war ending. 
We are at a critical moment in history: What America does--or fails to do--will determine whether peace and freedom can be won in the coming generation. 
That is why the way in which we end this conflict is so crucial to our efforts to build a lasting peace in coming decades. 
Theright way out of Vietnam is crucial to our changing role in the world and to peace in the world




88 - The President's News Conference on Foreign Policy
March 4, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. NO. As a matter of fact what has already been accomplished in Laos at this time has insured even more the plan for withdrawal of American troops. I will make another announcement in April, as I have previously indicated. And the disruption of the supply lines of the enemy through Laos, which has now occurred for 3 weeks, has very seriously damaged the enemy's ability to wage effective action against our remaining forces in Vietnam and assures even more the success of our troop withdrawal program. 
One other point that has been assured. I just had a report from General Abrams today with regard to the performance of the South Vietnamese. You ladies and gentlemen will recall that at the time of Cambodia I pointed out that the South Vietnamese Army had come of age. But then they were fighting side by side with American ground forces. Now in southern Laos and also in Cambodia, the South Vietnamese on the ground by themselves are taking on the very best units that the North Vietnamese can put in the field. 
General Abrams tells me that in both Laos and in Cambodia his evaluation after 3 weeks of fighting is that--to use his terms--the South Vietnamese by themselves can hack it, and they can give a better account of themselves even than the North Vietnamese units. This means that our withdrawal program, our Vietnamization program is a success and can continue on schedule, and we trust even ahead of schedule, assuming that there is more progress in Laos. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Risher [Eugene V. Risher, United Press International], I think it is important to restate the answer that I gave at the last news conference, because you will recall that was in the office where only you ladies and gentlemen who regularly cover the White House were present, and the television audience did not hear the answer. 
To restate it completely, let me break it down into its component parts. First, the question is: What will President Thieu in South Vietnam do? The second question is: What will the United States do? And third: What might we do together? 
Now, on the first question, President Thieu has stated that he would consider the necessity of invading North Vietnam. Let's look at his position. There are no South Vietnamese in North Vietnam. There are 100,000 North Vietnamese in South Vietnam, and they have already killed over 200,000 South Vietnamese. Therefore, President Thieu has to take the position that unless the North Vietnamese leave South Vietnam alone, he has to consider the possibility of going against the North. That is his position, and I am not going to speculate on what position he might take in the future in order to defend himself, theright of self-defense, in view of the fact that he is being attacked, he is not attacking North Vietnam. 
The second part of the question deals with what we will do. And there, as you will recall, I stated that American policy is that we will have no ground forces in North Vietnam, in Cambodia, or in Laos, except, of course, for rescue teams which go in for American fliers or for prisoners of war where we think there is an opportunity in that case. 
On the other hand, I have stated on 10 different occasions, usually before press conferences in which you ladies and gentlemen have participated, that in two respects we would use air power against the North. One, that we would attack those missile sites that fired at our planes, and we have been doing that. We will continue to do that. 
Second, that if I determined that increased infiltration from North Vietnam endangered our remaining forces in South Vietnam at a time we were withdrawing, I would order attacks on the supply routes, on the infiltration routes, on the military complexes, and I have done that in the past. And I shall do so again if I determine that such activities by North Vietnam may endanger our remaining forces in South Vietnam, particularly as we are withdrawing. 
Now, the third question is this one: whether or not the United States, through its air power, might support a South Vietnamese operation against North Vietnam. And the answer to that is that no such plan is under consideration in this Government. 
THE PRESIDENT. We are following that very closely, and it is not unusually alarming. We expect the enemy to improve its capabilities just as we improve ours. And we are prepared to take the protective reaction measures which will deal very effectively with it. But I can say it will not be tit for tat
We are for a total withdrawal of all American forces on a mutual basis. As far as those forces are concerned, I have stated in this press conference that Gene Risher referred to a moment ago, I have stated, however, that as long as there are American POW's--and there are 1,600 Americans1 in North Vietnam jails under very difficult circumstances at the present time--as long as there are American POW's in North Vietnam we will have to maintain a residual force in South Vietnam. That is the least that we can negotiate for. 
As far as our goal is concerned, our goal is to get all Americans out of Vietnam as soon as we can, by negotiation, if possible, and through our withdrawal program and Vietnamization program, if necessary. 
Now, as to when we will have them out, I will make the announcements in due time. I have another one coming in April, and I will be making other announcements. And I think the record will be a pretty good one when we have concluded. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Bailey, I can say further that no such plan has ever been suggested by President Thieu to us. None has been considered, and none is under consideration. 
I am not going to go further than that, except to state what I did state in that press conference where you also were present again, that the test as to what the United States will do in North Vietnam, in any event, will always be not what happens to forces of South Vietnam, but it will be whether or not the President as Commander in Chief considers that North Vietnamese activities are endangering or may endanger the American forces as we continue to withdraw. 
It is then and only then that I will use air power against military complexes on the borders of North Vietnam. 
THE PRESIDENT. The proposal we have made, Mr. terHorst [J. F. terHorst, Detroit News, North American Newspaper Alliance], is, of course, for a Southeast Asia settlement, one in which the North Vietnamese troops--there are 40,000, approximately, as you know, in Cambodia, there are now approximately, by latest estimate, 90,000 to 100,000 in Laos and, of course, there are 100,000 or so in South Vietnam. It is a one-package situation. 
As far as we are concerned, that is the proposal and that is the one that we will stick by in Paris
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Lisagor, our goal is a complete American withdrawal from Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam. As you know, that is the proposal I made on October 7 [1970]. I made it, however, on a mutual basis, that we would withdraw, but that the North Vietnamese would withdraw at the same time. 
Now, as to what happens after we withdraw, we cannot guarantee that North and South Vietnam will not continue to be enemies. We cannot guarantee that there will not continue to be some kind of guerrilla activities in Laos or even in Cambodia. As far as our own goal is concerned, our proposal is clear, and we ask the enemy to consider it: a mutual withdrawal of forces, our forces and theirs. If that happens, we will be glad to withdraw, and then these other nations will have to see whether or not they can handle their own affairs
And, most significant, I checked the flow of supplies down the trails from the area in which the North Vietnamese and and the South Vietnamese are engaged. And General Abrams reports that there has been a 55 percent decrease in truck traffic south into South Vietnam, which means that those trucks that do not go south will not carry the arms and the men that will be killing Americans. 
I am only suggesting while the jury is still out, remember the purpose of this, like the purpose of Cambodia, is to reduce American forces, to reduce our casualties. And I should point out that that is exactly what this Administration has done. We have kept every promise that we have made. We have reduced our forces. We have reduced our casualties. We are going to continue to reduce our forces, and we are getting out of Vietnam in a way that Vietnam will be able to defend itself
The more that the disruption of the complex of trails leading from North Vietnam to South Vietnam occurs in the operation now being conducted on the ground by the South Vietnamese in southern Laos--the more that that occurs, the more successful that it is, the greater the possibility that the United States may be able to increase the rate of its troop withdrawal




110 - "A Conversation With the President," Interview With Howard K. Smith of the American Broadcasting Company
March 22, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I also said, however, at that time, that I would use American air power anyplace in North Vietnam, or in the Southeast Asian area, where I found that it would be necessary for the purpose of protecting American forces in South Vietnam. 
Now, my decision with regard to the use of American air power, whether it is against North Vietnam--there was a strike there yesterday, as you know, against some SAM sites which had been shooting at some of our reconnaissance planes--whether that air power is used, as it has been used, in Laos, for the purpose of supporting the South Vietnamese in their efforts to blunt the North Vietnamese attack, which would be, thereby, launched against the South, and against Americans eventually, or whether it was used in Cambodia, the primary, purpose was not for the assistance, for the purpose of assisting the South Vietnamese, not for the purpose of assisting the Cambodians, but the purpose was and the justification was, and must always be, the defense of American forces in South Vietnam. 
And as Commander in Chief, I had that responsibility. I had met it, and I believe this is correct. 
THE PRESIDENT. Oh, yes. The military commander in Saigon was actually completely correct and so was I. We were talking about two different things. You see, there is traffic on the Ho Chi Minh Trail north of the area around Tchepone, where the operation of the South Vietnamese was taking place. There is traffic south of the area of Tchepone. 
Now, as far as the traffic coming down the trail to Tchepone, where the battle was taking place between the South Vietnamese forces and the North Vietnamese forces, that traffic actually was very greatly increased. But as far as the traffic south of Tchepone was concerned, that traffic was substantially reduced. 
As a matter of fact, I have since found that 55 percent, my estimate, was too low--that actually the traffic had been cut more than that. I would say that perhaps
75 percent of the traffic has been cut south, at that time, south of the area of the fighting. 
And it, of course, stands to good reason why. Because the units fighting--the North Vietnamese fighting in that area against the South Vietnamese--they needed those supplies, they needed the trucks, they needed all the other things that normally would go south. And they chewed them up. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, let's look at two different areas, Mr. Smith. First, let's look at the area of Cambodia. As you know--as a matter of fact, as you and some other commentators have pointed out--at the time when all eyes have been on Laos, a very significant operation has been going on in Cambodia. 
Perhaps it is not as well known that at that time, in that operation where over 4,000 North Vietnamese who have already been casualties--in that operation, it has been entirely conducted by the South Vietnamese, and 75 percent of all the air sorties in that operation are South Vietnamese. South Vietnam has a very good air force. It isn't yet big enough, however, to handle the kind of operation that they have in Cambodia as well as the one in Laos. 
Now, when we look at the situation in Laos what do we find there? We found that the South Vietnamese went in with forces that numerically were very inferior to the forces that they found. As a matter of fact, the North Vietnamese had twice as many ground forces in the area of Laos, of southern Laos, as South Vietnam had. 
South Vietnam had, of course, to have support, firepower support, through our air power, which would equalize that difference. And without that firepower support, it would have, of course, been very foolish to have the South Vietnamese go in on the ground against the superior North Vietnamese forces. 
What this all means, of course, is that South Vietnam, man for man, when there is not a numerical superiority on the part of the enemy, will be able to--to use the parochial term--"hack it," in my opinion and in General Abrams' opinion. 
And I should also point out this: That in Laos they were fighting on the enemy's terrain, on his turf, against overwhelming numbers. When they fight in South Vietnam, they are going to be fighting on their terrain with their having the numerical advantage and the enemy having the long supply line. 
THE PRESIDENT. They can never gain back the time, Mr. Smith. Six weeks is a period in which the Communists not only have found, as we pointed out earlier, that the supplies to the South have been drastically cut--during that 6-week period they have had chewed up great amounts of ammunition, great amounts of materiel that otherwise would have gone South and would have been used, incidentally, against many Americans fighting in South Vietnam--and also in that 6-week period the South Vietnamese have developed a considerable capability on their own and considerable confidence on their own. They are better units to handle the situation as we withdraw. 
Now, insofar as what they are going to be able to do for the balance of this dry season is concerned, I can only suggest that I cannot predict what will happen today, tomorrow, or the next day. There is going to be some more severe fighting as the South Vietnamese continue to withdraw from Laos. That we expected. 
Let me hit it very directly. This is not the kind of an operation that you can really describe in the traditional terms of victory or defeat, because its purpose was not to conquer territory. Its purpose was not to destroy an army. Its purpose was simply to disrupt supply lines. Its purpose, in other words, was not to conquer or occupy a part of Laos; its purpose was to defend South Vietnam. 
Now, let's measure this operation in terms of accomplishing that purpose. For 6 weeks the South Vietnamese have disrupted the enemy's supply lines. For 6 weeks they have tied down some of the enemy's best divisions. For 6 weeks we have seen, too, that the South Vietnamese have been able to handle themselves quite well under very, very difficult circumstances. 
Third, as far as the ARVN is concerned, and here I come back to an expert, General Abrams, who tells it like it is and says it like it is, says that some of their units did not do so well but 18 out of 22 battalions conducted themselves with high morale, with great confidence, and they are able to defend themselves man for man against the North Vietnamese. 
Finally, the pictures have not shown at all what has happened to the enemy, and their losses by conservative estimates are five times as large as the losses of the ARVN. So, under the circumstances I am not saying here that what we are looking at is an operation which at this time can be judged a great success or, by the same token, I say we cannot say that this is an operation that should be judged a failure. I do say that based on the progress that has been made to date, the two things that the American people can judge it on mean a great deal to them: One, that the American withdrawal will continue; two, that the danger to America's remaining forces has been reduced. Of those two things I am sure, and for that reason the operation was worthwhile as far as we are concerned. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Smith, I know you were stationed in Europe for a while and when you were there you probably did what I did when I was there from time to time. I sometimes picked up one of the British or European papers. The London Economist, for example, is a pretty good objective paper. I don't think it could be called a pro-Nixon Administration paper necessarily. But they had a very interesting piece the other day in which they pointed out that when the United States was criticized for expanding the war by reason of our destroying the sanctuaries in Cambodia and supporting the South Vietnamese effort to blunt the North Vietnamese attack in Laos, it said that kind of reasoning would have said that, in effect, when Eisenhower ordered the landings on D-Day, or the landings in Italy in World War II, that the purpose of that was to expand the war into Europe. 
Now, let me say this: Everything that I have done since I have been President has had, as far as South Vietnam is concerned, and North Vietnam and Cambodia and Laos, one purpose, and that is to end America's involvement, but to end it in a way that South Vietnam will continue to survive as an independent country, have a chance to survive. We can't guarantee their survival. 
Now, let me say why the second part of that equation is important. Anybody could end the war in Vietnam by just withdrawing, "bugging out" as it has been called, and there are those now in the House and Senate who say, well, let's end it by the end of this year without regard to the consequences. 
But, Mr. Smith, the reason I can't do that, even though politically there is great temptation to do it, is that I think I know what would happen. I have been to Asia a number of times, and I think what would happen is that if after all of this sacrifice and all of this effort the United States, right at the time that we are winding doom the war and bringing our men home, at a time when the South Vietnamese are achieving the capability of hacking it, of taking care of their own defense--if the United States now were to throw in the towel and come home, and the Communists took over South Vietnam, then all over Southeast Asia, all over the Pacific, in the Mideast, in Europe, in the world, the United States would suffer a blow, and peace, because we are the great peace-keeping nation in the world today because of our power, would suffer a blow from which it might not recover. That is why I am doing this. 
I am doing these things, everything I am doing, not for the purpose of expanding a war but ending it, and ending a war in a way that we can win a peace. That is something we haven't done for a long time in this country. 
First, it would torpedo any chances for a negotiated settlement which might-there is still some chance; I agree not much, but still some--the moment that we tell the enemy that we are going to get out as of a date certain, then any negotiating stroke we have with regard to accelerating or some way getting our prisoners back a little sooner is completely thrown in. 
It also has the effect, once we set the deadline, of completely continuing this operation out there on the enemy's terms. 
They know exactly what we are going to do, and then they can proceed to make their plans on that assumption. 
Now, what are we doing--let me say I know when we are going to get out. We have a plan. It is being implemented. I will make another announcement on that plan in April. I won't go into it tonight, because it would not be proper to do so until we have all the facts and figures. But it will be at least at the level that we have been going through withdrawals up to this point. 
But as far as a deadline is concerned, while the next announcement, I am sure, will give some indication as to the end of the tunnel, we are not going to tell the enemy now that there is no need for them to negotiate, that there is nothing to be gained by their coming to the conference table and negotiating with regard to an exchange of prisoners, possibly with regard to an all-Indochina peace conference. 
You see, these are high stakes. And as long as there is a chance on those stakes for us to have a negotiation, we have got to continue to play the game out. 
THE PRESIDENT. You are absolutely right with regard to how wars have come ers have started them. The United States was drawn into World War I. It was drawn into World War II. We were drawn into World War II. We were drawn into Korea because the North Koreans attacked, and then we came in to help save South Korea, and so it was in Vietnam. North Vietnam attacked South Vietnam; no South Vietnamese attacked North Vietnam, as you are aware. 
Now, if the United States doesn't play that role, there will be another war. I mean by that, for example, for one thing, that how we end the war in Vietnam will have a great effect on whether there will be another war like that. 
If the war in Vietnam is ended in a way that it is considered to be an American defeat or a reward for those who engage in aggression, or an encouragement to the hard-liners in the Communist world, then they will do it again. 
That is why ending the war in Vietnam in a way that does not reward Communist aggression, that is something that is essential if we are going to avoid another war. 
And may I say, too, that the thousands of North Vietnamese who were casualties in North Vietnam [Cambodia and Laos], the hundreds, the millions of rounds of ammunition that were destroyed there, the time that was bought there, all of these things--that means that the risk to American lives is substantially reduced, and that is why the support of that operation was worthwhile, in my opinion




135 - Address to the Nation on the Situation in Southeast Asia.
April 7, 1971

Now let me turn to the Laotian operation. As you know, this was undertaken by South Vietnamese ground forces with American air support against North Vietnamese troops which had been using Laotian territory for 6 years to attack American forces and allied forces in South Vietnam. Since the completion of that operation, there has been a great deal of understandable speculation--just as there was after Cambodia--whether or not it was a success or a failure, a victory or a defeat. But, as in Cambodia, what is important is not the instant analysis of the moment, but what happens in the future. 
First, the South Vietnamese demonstrated that without American advisers they could fight effectively against the very best troops North Vietnam could put in the field. 
Third, and most important, the disruption of enemy supply lines, the consumption of ammunition and arms in the battle has been even more damaging to the capability of the North Vietnamese to sustain major offensives in South Vietnam than were the operations in Cambodia 10 months ago. 
Consequently, tonight I can report that Vietnamization has succeeded. Because of the increased strength of the South Vietnamese, because of the success of the Cambodian operation, because of the achievements of the South Vietnamese operation in Laos, I am announcing an increase in the rate of American withdrawals. Between May 1 and December 1 of this year, 100,000 more American troops will be brought home from South Vietnam. This will bring the total number of American troops withdrawn from South Vietnam to 365,000. Now that is over two-thirds of the number who were there when I came into office, as you can see from this chart on my left. The Government of South Vietnam fully supports the decision I have just announced. 
Now, let's look at the future: 
As you can see from the progress we have made to date and by this announcement tonight, the American involvement in Vietnam is coming to an end. The day the South Vietnamese can take over their own defense is in sight. Our goal is a total American withdrawal from Vietnam. We can and we will reach that goal through our program of Vietnamization if necessary. 
But we would infinitely prefer to reach it even sooner--through negotiations. I am sure most of you will recall that on October 7 of last year in a national TV broadcast, I proposed an immediate cease-fire throughout Indochina, the immediate release of all prisoners of war in the Indochina area, an all-Indochina peace conference, the complete withdrawal of all outside forces, and a political settlement. Tonight I again callon Hanoi to engage in serious negotiations to speed the end of this war. I especially callon Hanoi to agree to the immediate and unconditional release of all prisoners of war throughout Indochina. Itistime for Hanoi to end the barbaric use of our prisoners as negotiating pawns and to join us in a humane act that will free their men as well as ours. 
Let me turn now to a proposal which at first glance has a great deal of popular appeal. If our goal is a total withdrawal of all our forces, why don't I announce a date now for ending our involvement? Well, the difficulty in making such an announcement to the American people is that I would also be making that announcement to the enemy. And it would serve the enemy's purpose and not our own. 
If the United States should announce that we will quit regardless of what the enemy does, we would have thrown away our principal bargaining counter to win the release of American prisoners of war, we would remove the enemy's strongest incentive to end the war sooner by negotiation, and we will have given enemy commanders the exact information they need to marshal their attacks against our remaining forces at their most vulnerable time. 
The issue very simply is this: Shall we leave Vietnam in a way that-by our own actions--consciously turns the country over to the Communists? Or shall we leave in a way that gives the South Vietnamese a reasonable chance to survive as a free people? My plan will end American involvement in a way that would provide that chance. And the other plan would end it precipitately and give victory to the Communists. 
In a deeper sense, we have the choice of ending our involvement in this war on a note of despair or on a note of hope. I believe, as Thomas Jefferson did, that Americans will always choose hope over despair. We have it in our power to leave Vietnam in a way that offers a brave people a realistic hope of freedom. We have it in our power to prove to our friends in the world that America's sense of responsibility remains the world's greatest single hope of peace. And above all, we have it in our power to close a difficult chapter in American history, not meanly but nobly--so that each one of us can come out of this searing experience with a measure of pride in our Nation, confidence in our own character, and hope for the future of the spirit of America. 
I know there are those who honestly believe that I should move to end this war without regard to what happens to South Vietnam. This way would abandon our friends. But even more important, we would abandon ourselves. We would plunge from the anguish of war into a nightmare of recrimination. We would lose respect for this Nation, respect for one another, respect for ourselves. 
The way to express that appreciation is to end America's participation in this conflict not in failure or in defeat, but in achievement of the great goals for which they fought: a South Vietnam free to determine its own future and an America no longer divided by war but united in peace. 
That is why it is so important how we end this war. By our decision we will demonstrate the kind of people we are and the kind of country we will become. 
That is why I have chartered the course I have laid out tonight: to end this war-but end it in a way that will strengthen trust for America around the world, not undermine it, in a way that will redeem the sacrifices that have been made, not insult them, in a way that will heal this Nation, not tear it apart. 
I can assure you tonight with confidence that American involvement in this war is coming to an end. 
Every time I talk to a brave wife of an American POW, every time I write a letter to the mother of a boy who has been killed in Vietnam, I become more deeply committed to end this war, and to end it in a way that we can build lasting peace. 
My fellow Americans, I want to end this war in a way that is worthy of the sacrifice of Karl Taylor, and I think he would want me to end it in a way that would increase the chances that Kevin and Karl, and all those children like them here and around the world, could grow up in a world where none of them would have to die in war; that would increase the chance for America to have what it has not had in this century--a full generation of peace. 


144 - Panel Interview at the Annual Convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
April 16, 1971
THE PRESIDENT. No, Mr. Dedmon, there really isn't a conflict between the two statements. I said that we would end our involvement in Vietnam. You will recall my speech last Wednesday. I said that our goal is a total American withdrawal from Vietnam. 
On October 7 of last year, you may recall, I said that we not only propose a total American withdrawal but a cease-fire all over Southeast Asia, which would, of course, mean no air power, no American forces there, no use of power in any way. 
As far as Mr. Laird's statement was concerned, what he was referring to was that pending the time that we can have a total withdrawal consistent with the principles that I laid down in my speech last week, it will be necessary for the United States to retain air power and to retain some residual forces. 
Our goal, however, is a total withdrawal. We do not have as a goal a permanent residual force such as we have in Korea at the present time. 
But it will be necessary for us to maintain forces in South Vietnam until two important objectives are achieved: one, the release of the prisoners of war held by North Vietnam in North Vietnam and other parts of Southeast Asia; and two, the ability of the South Vietnamese to develop the capacity to defend themselves against a Communist takeover--not the sure capacity, but at least the chance. 
Once those two objectives are achieved, then the total American withdrawal can be undertaken and will be undertaken. 
We can achieve them earlier, provided the enemy will negotiate. As you noticed, on October 7 I indicated we will have a total withdrawal in 12 months if they would be willing to mutually withdraw their forces. 
And so, in sum, the goal of American policy in Vietnam is a total withdrawal with no residual force. But, as long as the prisoner issue remains unsettled, and as long as they hold prisoners, and as long as the South Vietnamese have not yet developed the capacity to defend themselves to take over from us the defense of their own country--a capacity that they rapidly are developing--we will have forces there. 
The date, let me say, cannot and must not be related to an election in the United States. Let's begin with that. I don't want one American to be in Vietnam one day longer than is necessary to achieve the two goals that I have mentioned: the release of our prisoners and the capacity of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves against a Communist takeover. 
Now, as far as that date is concerned, it will depend upon the circumstances. I have announced a troop withdrawal which takes us through November [December] 1. In the middle of October [November], I will make another troop withdrawal announcement. 
I will then analyze the training of the South Vietnamese forces and particularly their air force at that time. I will then analyze enemy activity and, also, any progress in negotiation, particularly in negotiation with regard to prisoners. 
At that time, I will be able to make a further announcement with regard to what our withdrawal will be. But for me to speculate about a date would not help us; it would only serve the enemy, and I am not going to do that even though it might be politically popular to set a date. 
I have to do what is right for the United States, right for our prisoners, and right for our goal of a South Vietnam with a chance to avoid a Communist takeover, which will contribute to a lasting peace in the Pacific and the world
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Chandler, as you know, we have had some pretty bitter experiences with some Communist nations with regard to American prisoners. We have had a very difficult experience with the North Vietnamese who have, without question, been the most barbaric in their handling of prisoners of any nation in modern history. Under the circumstances, however, let's put ourselves in the position of North Vietnam. What is in it for them? What is in it for them is to get the United States residual force, including our air power, out of that part of the world. 
Now, that is a lot for them. That, it seems to me, will be a great incentive when the time comes that they have to make the decision as to whether they are going to retain prisoners or whether they are going to have to continue as they will have to continue to be exposed to an American presence in South Vietnam and to American airstrikes which, of course, we will continue in the event that they play that kind of a game with the prisoners. 
We have some cards to play, too, and we are going to play them right to the hilt where the prisoners are concerned. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Chandler, it means that, first, we haven't given up on the Paris talks. I would suggest that the moment of truth is arriving with regard to the Paris talks because time will soon run out. As the number of our forces goes down, our stroke at the negotiating table recedes and the South Vietnamese's greatly increases. 
So, if they want to negotiate with the United States, the time for negotiation, except for the prisoner issue, of course, is rapidly drawing to a close. But I would say that as far as our presence in South Vietnam is concerned--I am speaking of an American force, of a residual force, and of an air presence--that as long as they do retain prisoners, no American President could simply remove our forces and remove the threat to them. 
We have the responsibility, as long as there is one American being held prisoner by North Vietnam, to have some incentive on our side to get that man released, and that is why we are going to retain that force until we get it, and I think it will work in the end
What it does mean, though, is that in terms of the use of air power, the use of air power against North Vietnam and its forces, that if at an appropriate time two things have been accomplished---one, the return of our prisoners, and the capability of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves--once those two things are achieved, then the use of that air power as against North Vietnam would no longer be contemplated and, therefore, our air power in that respect could be reduced. 
Our airstrikes, as you know from having covered this closely from the White House, have also been reduced; our attack air sorties since we came into office have been reduced by 45 percent. They will continue to go down. 
But, on the other hand, we must retain that air power, as well as residual forces, as long as we have the prisoner problem and as long as there is still a time needed for the South Vietnamese to develop the capability of self-defense
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Mr. Dickinson, let's look at the Asian lives. I think of the 50,000 South Vietnamese civilians who have been murdered by North Vietnamese and VC since this war began. I think of a half million, by conservative estimates, in North Vietnam who were murdered or otherwise exterminated by the North Vietnamese after they took over from the South. 
I visited South Vietnam just after the North Vietnamese took over in North Vietnam. As a matter of fact, I am one of the few people, at least in public life, who has been to Hanoi. I was there in 1953 and then came back in 1956. I visited a refugee camp. A million refugees came from North Vietnam to South Vietnam. And they came there because of the terrible atrocities that were visited upon them by the Government of North Vietnam. 
Now, let's talk for a moment to put that in balance. We say, what about the people in Laos? As far as the activities in Laos are concerned, the bombing activities in Laos are concerned, if you will look at that particular area that is totally occupied by the North Vietnamese at this time, the number of civilians could be very, very small. As far as civilian casualties in South Vietnam are concerned from airstrikes, they are very, very small, because the war has moved out of South Vietnam. The South Vietnamese now have taken it over. And as far as our activities are concerned, on balance I would say that the United States, by its actions in South Vietnam-and I say I understand the controversy, the difficulty, the moral concern that many Americans have about all wars, and particularly this kind of a war, so difficult to understand--but on balance, I will say this: that if the United States were to fail in Vietnam, if the Communists were to take over, the bloodbath that would follow would be a blot on this Nation's history from which we would find it very difficult to return. 
Now, it is not necessary--we are now in a position where we can and, I can confidently say, we are ending American involvement; we are going to end it in a way that will, we believe, give South Vietnam a chance--not guarantee it--to defend itself against a Communist takeover. And I believe that this will save many more thousands of Asian lives than it is contended were lost because of American activities



154 - The President's News Conference
April 29, 1971

All that I am saying now is this: We are in this war, and the way the United States ends this war is going to determine to a great extent whether we are going to avoid this kind of involvement in the future. 
If we end it in a way that encourages those who engage in aggression to try it again, we will have more wars like this. But, if we end it in a way that I have laid out, one that will end it in a way that the South Vietnamese will have a chance to defend themselves and to choose the kind of government they want in a free election, then we will have a chance to have peace in their time that I referred to a moment ago. 
THE PRESIDENT. You very well have put the problem that we always are confronted with. You may recall very well that when President Johnson ordered the bombing halt it was with the assumption that the North Vietnamese would negotiate seriously on ending the war. 
They didn't do it. So a promise to discuss means nothing from the North Vietnamese. What we need is far more than that. We need action on their part and a commitment on their part with regard to the prisoners. 
Consequently, as far as any action on our part of ending American involvement completely--and that means a total withdrawal concerned, that will have to be delayed until we get not just the promise to discuss the release of our prisoners but a commitment to release our prisoners, because a discussion promise means nothing where the North Vietnamese are concerned. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have set forth, both in my speech of October 7 and then on April 7, a complete American proposal for negotiation. I am not going in a press conference to depart from those proposals. 
Those proposals include a cease-fire; they include an exchange of prisoners; they included, as you know, a mutual withdrawal of forces and an Indochina peace conference. 
Today in Paris, as you may note, we, along with the South Vietnamese, offered to repatriate--as a matter of fact, we are going unilaterally to repatriate, without regard to what the North Vietnamese do, 540 [570] North Vietnamese sick and wounded. 
And, in addition to that, we offered to send to a neutral country 1,600 [1,200] North Vietnamese prisoners who have been prisoners for 4 years or longer. We trust that the North Vietnamese will respond. 
We also offered, as you know, to have inspection of our camps, not just by the International Red Cross but by a third country or any other international organization. 
Ambassador Bruce puts the prisoner question by my direct orders at the highest priority. He is directed to discuss it separately, to discuss it with other issues, or discuss it as part of an overall settlement. We are ready to settle it whenever they are ready to talk about it. And I will say finally, that under no circumstances will our withdrawal programs abandon our POW's. We will be there as long as they have any prisoners in North Vietnam
THE PRESIDENT. The residual force, I think, first, Mr. Lisagor, with regard to the POW's, will be indefinite. In other words, if the North Vietnamese are so barbaric that they continue to hold our POW's, regardless of what we do with regard to withdrawal, then we are going to keep a residual force no matter how long it takes. 
Second, however, with regard to the ability of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves is concerned, we have a very good idea when that will occur. And as soon as that eventuality occurs, we will be able to move on that. 
So, I think I am answering your question by saying, in effect, that the two are separable. One will occur before the other, unless the North Vietnamese do move on the POW's




189 - The President's News Conference
June 1, 1971

We hope that the refusal of the others to go back will not deter the North Vietnamese at least to consider some kind of action on their part with regard to sick and disabled prisoners.
Mr. Rather [Dan Rather, CBS News]. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Rather, I discussed this matter with Ambassador Bruce when he was here. And I asked him what success he had had in raising this question with the North Vietnamese, because, as you note, they have even put out stories to the effect that if we would set a date certain, way in the future, they would be willing to move on the prisoner issue. It always comes back to the same thing. If we end our involvement in Vietnam and set a date, they will agree to discuss prisoners, not release them. 
Now, we have been around this track before. I should point out that when President Johnson agreed to the bombing halt in October of 1968, he did so with the understanding that there was going to be progress in the negotiations, that there was going to be discussions, and for 2? years we have had discussions in Paris and no progress. 
Now, as far as we are concerned, we at this time are not going to make any kind of agreement with regard to prisoners that is not going to be followed by action or concurrent with action; from the standpoint of the North Vietnamese, we have yet no indication whatever that they would be willing to release prisoners in the event that we took certain steps


250 - The President's News Conference
August 4, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I have noted some criticism in the press about the fact that Ambassador Bruce had to leave August 1. Incidentally, I am most grateful that he stayed an extra month, because his doctor got hold of me and said he should have left July 1. But, in any event, his having left August I, and Mr. Porter not being able to arrive of the latter part of August, there has been some speculation, in fact there is--and I understand this--criticism in the press and the Senate and the House that the Administration is not interested in negotiating a settlement, that we are not considering the various proposals that have been made by the VC and the North Vietnamese. 
Now, just so the members of the press will not get out on a limb with regard to predicting what we are. or are not doing, let me make one statement, and then I will go no further. 
We are very actively pursuing negotiations on Vietnam in established channels. The record, when it finally comes out, will answer all the critics as far as the activity of this Government' in pursuing negotiations in established channels. It would not be useful to negotiate in the newspapers if we want to have those negotiations succeed. 
I am not predicting that the negotiations will succeed. I am saying, however, that as far as the United States is concerned, we have gone and are going the extra mile on negotiations in established channels. You can interpret that any way you want, but do not interpret it in a way that indicates that the United States is missing this opportunity, that opportunity, or another one, to negotiate. 
THE PRESIDENT. It has certainly in terms of the North Vietnamese. As you know, the stumbling block for them in negotiations really is the political settlement. As they look at the election this fall, they feel that unless that election comes out in a way that a candidate they can support--or at least that they are not as much against as they are President Thieu--but unless it comes out that way, it will be very difficult for them to have a negotiated settlement



292 - The President's News Conference
September 16, 1971

I again say that we would prefer, as far as South Vietnam is concerned, that its democratic processes would grow faster. We believe that considerable headway has been made. We believe that the situation from that standpoint is infinitely better in South Vietnam where they at least have some elections than in North Vietnam where they have none, and we are going to continue to work toward that goal




303 - Remarks at a Question-and-Answer Session for Northwest Editors, Publishers, and Broadcast Executives Attending a Briefing on Domestic Policy in Portland, Oregon
September 25, 1971

That doesn't mean that we like it that way, but it does mean that the road toward democracy and contested elections is a long and hard one. But the main thing is to be on the road and give people a chance to have it that way, rather than to let those people end up on the kind of a road where there is no election and no hope of one in the future, which is the case in North Vietnam



356 - The President's News Conference
November 12, 1971

Based on those consultations and consultations with the Government of South Vietnam, I am now able to make this announcement. Over the next 2 months we will withdraw 45,000 Americans. I will make another announcement before the first of February. As far as that second announcement is concerned, before the first of February, the number to be withdrawn--the rate, that is--as well as the duration of the announcement, will be determined by three factors: 
First, by the level of enemy activity and particularly by the infiltration route and its rate, because if the level of enemy activity and infiltration substantially increased, it could be very dangerous to our sharply decreased forces in South Vietnam. 
Second, the progress of our training program, our Vietnamization program in South Vietnam. 
And third, any progress that may have been made with regard to two major objectives that we have--obtaining the release of all of our POW's wherever they are in Southeast Asia and obtaining a cease-fire for all of Southeast Asia. 
Those three criteria will determine the next announcement, both its duration and its rate. 
Now, I will be glad to take questions on this announcement or any other subject, domestic or foreign, that you would like to cover. 
THE PRESIDENT. That is our goal, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News], yes. As you know, we have offered that in my talk of last year in October. We have been continuing to offer it. We would, of course, believe that attaining that goal would bring peace to the whole area, which is what we want, and, of course, would greatly reduce the need for a very heavy American aid program that presently we have for, particularly, Cambodia. 
THE PRESIDENT. No reason for encouragement that I can talk about publicly. I can say, however, that we are pursuing this subject, as I have indicated on several occasions, in a number of channels, and we have not given up. We will never give up with regard to our prisoners of war. That is one of the reasons why this announcement is being made for a shorter period rather than a longer period, because the moment that we make an announcement that is too long, it means that whatever negotiating stroke we might have is substantially reduced. 
THE PRESIDENT. We would have to examine that situation at the time. The infiltration rate has come up some as it always does at this time of year. However, it is not as high now, just as the casualties are not as high now, and the level of enemy activity, as it was last year. We want to see, however, what the situation is in December and January, which, as you all know, are the key months when infiltration comes along, because that will determine what the activity will be in April, May, June, and July on the battlefield. 
THE PRESIDENT. It will be a new troop ceiling for the end of the withdrawal period. I think we would have to cover that later. The 45,000 should be taken off of the present ceiling. We are reducing the ceiling by 45,000. 
Now, incidentally, I should say, too, that in terms of the withdrawal--I think it would be proper to inform the press on this matter--we are going to withdraw 25,000 in December and 20,000 in January. Obviously we would like to get a few more out before Christmas, and we were able to do this after Secretary Laird made his report. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, first, the situation is very different because, as we get down in numbers, each withdrawal has a much more dramatic effect on the percentage that we have there: 45,000 as against, for example, 184,000, which is the present troop ceiling, is a lot different from 25,000 as against 539,000 or 540,000, which was our first withdrawal program. 
So, consequently, it is essential as we get closer to the end, if we are going to maintain any negotiating leverage, that the withdrawal periods, in my opinion, be somewhat shorter. 
With regard to other questions that we have on this--does that cover that point? 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the combat role, let us understand, based on the casualties, as far as an offensive situation is concerned is already concluded. American troops are now in a defensive position. They, however, will defend themselves, and what casualties we have taken--they are very small will be taken in that defensive role. 
You will find as you analyze the battlefield reports, as I do from time to time, that the offensive activities of search and destroy, and all the other activities that we used to undertake, are now being undertaken entirely by the South Vietnamese. 
THE PRESIDENT. That is a matter which is worked out by General Abrams in the field, and it is one that has gradually just come about. No orders need to be given for that purpose. And, incidentally, that is possible due to the fact that the South Vietnamese have gained the capability to handle the situation themselves. 
Also, there is another reason. As we get down to 184,000, and now at the end of this period 45,000 less than that, what offensive capabilities we have are very, very seriously limited. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would respond to that only by saying that we have not given up on the negotiating front. This announcement is somewhat of an indication that we have not given up on the negotiating front. I, however, would not like to leave the impression that we see the possibility of some striking breakthrough in negotiations in the near future. 
But we are pursuing negotiations in Paris and through whatever other channels we think are appropriate. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, it would not be a correct inference to draw. I wish that it were, because this issue should, of course, as we all, I think, believe, be separated from the issue of the combat role of Americans and our withdrawal program. It is a humanitarian issue. But we as yet have not had any progress in our talks with the North Vietnamese in getting them to separate the issue from the rest. 
On the other hand, we have not given up on the negotiating track, and we are going to continue to press on that track because that is the track on which we eventually are going to have success in getting our prisoners back. 
THE PRESIDENT. I do not want to give any false encouragement to those who are the next of kin or who are close relatives of our prisoners. I can only say, however, that we, on our part, have taken initiatives on a number of fronts here. So the possibility of progress in the future is there. As far as the enemy's position is concerned, it is still intransigent. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, air power, of course, as far as our use of it is concerned, will continue to be used longer than our ground forces, due to the fact that training Vietnamese to handle the aircraft takes the longest lead time, as we know. And we will continue to use it in support of the South Vietnamese until there is a negotiated settlement or, looking further down the road, until the South Vietnamese have developed the capability to handle the situation themselves. 
As far as our air power is concerned, let me also say this: As we reduce the number of our forces, it is particularly important for us to continue our airstrikes on the infiltration routes. If we see any substantial step-up in infiltration in the passes, for example, which lead from North Vietnam into Laos and, of course, the Laotian trail which comes down through Cambodia into South Vietnam-if we see that, we will have to not only continue our airstrikes; we will have to step them up. 
That is why I have been quite categorical with regard to that situation, because as the number of our forces goes down, their danger increases, and we are notgoingtoallow the enemy to pounce on them by reason of our failure to use air power against increased infiltration, if it occurs. 
THE PRESIDENT. The major reason they are the weakest they have been since the war is because of Cambodia and Laos, and the floods, of course, have hurt them, too.
It was not a question of sliding in, but was a question of decisions being made, first, to send American combat troops in. Those were first made, you know, by President Kennedy, the first troops that went in; and then the decisions to bomb in the North, those were made by President Johnson, and the increases in forces




363 - Remarks to the AFL-CIO Ninth Constitutional Convention in Bal Harbour, Florida.
November 19, 1971

So with regard to our efforts in this field, to win a lasting peace, let me say that we are moving in the area of Vietnam. Oh, not the easy way--just get out and let the Communists take over the country--that would only plant the seeds for another war and more aggression, because it would encourage it in the future; but theright way, the honorable way in which the people of South Vietnam have a chance to determine what shall be the future, at some time in the future, without having that imposed upon them by the Communists from the North



412 - Informal Exchange With Reporters Following the President's Annual Physical Examination.
December 24, 1971

THE PRESIDENT. I can only say that the efforts that he makes and that anybody makes are deeply appreciated. This is perhaps the most discouraging aspect of our foreign policy at the moment, our inability to get a nation which basically is governed by international outlaws to abide by the very basic rules of international conduct in any way. But we are continuing to work on it, and I think efforts by people like Bob Hope may tend to emphasize to the North Vietnamese the fact that world opinion--if they pay any attention to world opinion--overwhelmingly believes that they should treat this as a humanitarian issue. 
We are going to continue to treat that, of course, as the very highest priority in the weeks ahead as we complete our own withdrawal from Vietnam. We must, of course, do everything we can, and we will do everything we can, to see that our POW's are returned



1 - "A Conversation With the President," Interview With Dan Rather of the Columbia Broadcasting System
January 2, 1972

THE PRESIDENT. With regard to the military benefits, let me say first why we did it. You were present in the White House Press Room, as you always are, when I was there making the last troop withdrawal announcement 1 which will bring the troops down to 139,000 by the first of February. And, at that time, I said that in the event that the enemy stepped up its infiltration, or engaged in other activities which imperiled, in my opinion our remaining forces as our forces were becoming less, that I would takeaction to deal with the situation. 
Most of you reported it. And most of the reporters also wrote it. I meant exactly what I said. The enemy did step up its infiltration. They violated the understanding of 1968, when the bombing halt was agreed to, with regard to firing on our unarmed reconnaissance planes. They shelled Saigon on December 19. 
Under those circumstances, I had no other choice but to bomb, in this case, selected military targets and supply buildup areas. Those were the only areas that were hit. 
The results have been very, very effective, and I think that their effectiveness will be demonstrated by the statement I am now going to make. 
Before the first of February, well before the first of February, I will make another withdrawal announcement. Our withdrawal will continue on schedule, at least at the present rate, possibly at somewhat a larger rate. I will not make the decision with regard to the rate at this point, but the withdrawal can go forward on schedule and as far as our American casualties are concerned, which, as you know, as reported on Thursday of last week on CBS and other networks, were one--the lowest in 6 years. 
THE PRESIDENT. It included a truce period, but as you know they have averaged less than 10 for 3 months, whereas they were averaging 300---up to 300 a week when we came into office. But our casualties as a result of these activities, I believe, can be kept at this very low level. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Rather, that depends on one circumstance, which is very. much in my mind, and in the minds I know of all of our listeners and viewers. That is the situation with regard to our POW's. First, as far as American involvement is concerned, we are still pursuing the negotiating track. There is a possibility--I know many believe there is no possibility, but I believe there is some--and we are continuing to pursue it with the meeting resuming next week, of ending the war through negotiation. We have offered, as you know, a cease-fire throughout Indochina, including Laos and Cambodia. We have offered a total withdrawal of all outside forces. We would offer an exchange of POW's, and under these circumstances, we believe that this is a time that those offers should seriously be considered. 
In the event that no progress is made on the negotiating front, then we will have to continue on what we call the Vietnamization front. Now it is quite obvious, if you look at the numbers, if we are down to 139,000 by the first of February, if I make another announcement of approximately the same level or at an even somewhat higher level for a period in the future, that the number of Americans in Vietnam will be down to a very low level well before the election. 
Now, the question arises then, can the President of the United States, sitting in this office, with the responsibility for 400 POW's and 1,500 missing in action throughout Southeast Asia, because they are also potential POW's, can he withdraw all of our forces as long as the enemy holds one American as a prisoner of war? The answer is no. 
So I would have to say that with regard to the statement that I made to Time magazine, our goal is to end the American involvement in Vietnam before the end of this year, and before the election, not just because it is an election, but because these are the ways our plans are working out. Our preference is to end it by negotiation. If that does not work we will do it by withdrawal through Vietnamization. But if POW's are still retained by North Vietnam, in order to have any bargaining position at all with the Vietnamese, North Vietnamese, we will have to continue to retain a residual force in Vietnam, and we will have to continue the possibility of air strikes on the North Vietnamese. 
As far as the POW problem is concerned, that is one that we unfortunately are confronted with. But let me just give this much hope to our POW people. I believe that as the enemy looks at the alternatives that they may decide, as they see the American involvement ending, that it would be well for them not to retain our POW's and run the risk that it would be necessary for the United States to stay in Vietnam. 
I know sometimes you and some of your colleagues have pointed out, and with very good reason, that if when we had 540,000 in Vietnam that had no effect in getting the enemy to negotiate on POW's, why would having 25 or 35 thousand as a residual force have any effect? And the answer is: Does the enemy want the United States to withdraw from Vietnam, or doesn't it? 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Rather, that particular matter has been one that has been under discussion at various times in the Paris peace talks, but you yourself recall, because you reported it, or at least your Paris correspondent reported it on CBS, and I think even NBC and ABC had this as well, that when that was floated out this fall, the North Vietnamese totally rejected it. 
In other words, that is the deal of saying that if we set a deadline, then they will give us back our POW's-- 
THE PRESIDENT. That was publicly done, that is correct. You remember the United States Senator had met, he said, with some of the people from North Vietnam.2 He was convinced that in the event that we set a deadline, that that would mean that they would release the prisoners. The North Vietnamese said deadline for prisoners was no deal. That was publicly stated. 
Under those circumstances, this, of course, is a very cruel action on their part, to reject out of hand even the possibility of that kind of discussion. 
I would say this, looking to the future, that as I have just pointed out, that when we come down to the end, as far as our own involvement in Vietnam is concerned, the question of whether or not they will return our prisoners in exchange for a total American withdrawal is one that they will have a chance to answer. 
And I could also point out that we have participated in a great number of discussions other than those public discussions in Paris. Sitting right here in this room--as a matter of fact, you are sitting in my chair, Mr. Gromyko was sitting in this chair--I raised the subject of POW's with him. Dr. Kissinger raised the subject with Chou En-lai on both of his visits to the People's Republic of China. 
THE PRESIDENT. In the event that at the time of the meetings that I will have in China and later on in the Soviet Union, we have not made progress in this area, the subjects will again be raised. 
Now, I am not suggesting--because, believe. me, it is a heartrending matter to read the letters from the POW wives and their next of kin in other ways, to read those letters and to realize how their hopes have been dashed year after year. But I can tell you that we have pursued every negotiating channel; that we have made a number of offers in various channels and that when the total record is published, and it will be published in due time, at an appropriate time, our lady from Florida and the others will realize that we have gone the extra mile as far as POW's are concerned. I do not want to disclose any further details became negotiations are underway. 
THE PRESIDENT. It will be on the agenda, I emphasize, provided it is still a live question, because we are, naturally, hoping that in both of these cases we can go forward. 
Now, let me point out, we should not give the impression that because we raised the subject with the Chinese, we raised it with the Soviet Union, that that is going to mean action, because we have raised it at other levels already. 
I would point out one slightly hopeful



21 - Address to the Nation Making Public a Plan for Peace in Vietnam
January 25, 1972

The offer that I shall now present, on behalf of the Government of the United States and the Government of South Vietnam, with the full knowledge and approval of President Thieu, is both generous and far-reaching. 
It is a plan to end the war now; it includes an offer to withdraw all American forces within 6 months of an agreement; its acceptance would mean the speedy return of all the prisoners of war to their homes. 
There were two honorable paths open to us. 
The path of negotiation was, and is, the path we prefer. But it takes two to negotiate; there had to be another way in case the other side refused to negotiate. 
That path we called Vietnamization. What it meant was training and equipping the South Vietnamese to defend themselves, and steadily withdrawing Americans, as they developed the capability to do so. 
The path of Vietnamization has been successful. Two weeks ago, you will recall, I announced that by May 1, American forces in Vietnam would be down to 69,000. That means almost one-half million Americans will have been brought home from Vietnam over the past 3 years. In terms of American lives, the losses of 300 a week have been reduced by over 95 percent--to less than 10 a week. 
But the path of Vietnamization has been the long voyage home. It has strained the patience and tested the perseverance of the American people. What of the shortcut, the shortcut we prefer, the path of negotiation? 
Progress here has been disappointing. The American people deserve an accounting of why it has been disappointing. Tonight I intend to give you that accounting, and in so doing, I am going to try to break the deadlock in the negotiations. 
We have made a series of public proposals designed to bring an end to the conflict. But early in this Administration, after 10 months of no progress in the public Paris talks, I became convinced that it was necessary to explore the possibility of negotiating in private channels, to see whether it would be possible to end the public deadlock. 
After consultation with Secretary of State Rogers, our Ambassador in Saigon, and our chief negotiator in Paris, and with the full knowledge and approval of President Thieu, I sent Dr. Kissinger to Paris as my personal representative on August 4, 1969, 30 months ago, to begin these secret peace negotiations. 
Since that time, Dr. Kissinger has traveled to Paris 12 times on these secret missions. He has met seven times with Le Duc Tho, one of Hanoi's top political leaders, and Minister Xuan Thuy, head of the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris talks, and he has met with Minister Xuan Thuy five times alone. I would like, incidentally, to take this opportunity to thank President Pompidou of France for his personal assistance in helping to make the arrangements for these secret talks. 
This is why I initiated these private negotiations: Privately, both sides can be more flexible in offering new approaches and also private discussions allow both sides to talk frankly, to take positions free from the pressure of public debate. 
In seeking peace in Vietnam, with so many lives at stake, I felt we could not afford to let any opportunity go by-private or public--to negotiate a settlement. As I have stated on a number of occasions, I was prepared and I remain prepared to explore any avenue, public or private, to speed negotiations to end the war. 
For 30 months, whenever Secretary Rogers, Dr. Kissinger, or I were asked about secret negotiations we would only say we were pursuing every possible channel in our search for peace. There was never a leak, because we were determined not to jeopardize the secret negotiations. Until recently, this course showed signs of yielding some progress. 
Now, however, it is my judgment that the purposes of peace will best be served by bringing out publicly the proposals we have been making in private. 
Nothing is served by silence when the other side exploits our good faith to divide America and to avoid the conference table. Nothing is served by silence when it misleads some Americans into accusing their own government of failing to do what it has already done. Nothing is served by silence when it enables the other side to imply possible solutions publicly that it has already flatly rejected privately. 
The time has come to lay the record of our secret negotiations on the table. Just as secret negotiations can sometimes break a public deadlock, public disclosure may help to break a secret deadlock. 
Some Americans, who believed what the North Vietnamese led them to believe, have charged that the United States has not pursued negotiations intensively. As the record that I now will disclose will show, just the opposite is true. 
Questions have been raised as to why we have not proposed a deadline for the withdrawal of all American forces in exchange for a cease-fire and the return of our prisoners of war; why we have not discussed the seven-point proposal made by the Vietcong last July in Paris; why we have not submitted a new plan of our own to move the negotiations off dead center. 
As the private record will show, we have taken all these steps and more-and have been flatly rejected or ignored by the other side. 
On May 31, 1971, 8 months ago, at one of the secret meetings in Paris, we offered specifically to agree to a deadline for the withdrawal of all American forces in exchange for the release of all prisoners of war and a cease-fire. 
At the next private meeting, on June 26, the North Vietnamese rejected our offer. They privately proposed instead their own nine-point plan which insisted that we overthrow the Government of South Vietnam. 
Five days later, on July 1, the enemy publicly presented a different package of proposals--the seven-point Vietcong plan. 
That posed a dilemma: Which package should we respond to, the public plan or the secret plan? 
On July 12, at another private meeting in Paris, Dr. Kissinger put that question to the North Vietnamese directly. They said we should deal with their nine-point secret plan, because it covered all of Indochina including Laos and Cambodia, while the Vietcong seven-point proposal was limited to Vietnam. 
So that is what we did. But we went even beyond that, dealing with some of the points in the public plan that were not covered in the secret plan. 
On August 16, at another private meeting, we went further. We offered the complete withdrawal of U.S. and allied forces within 9 months after an agreement on an overall settlement. On September 13, the North Vietnamese rejected that proposal. They continued to insist that we overthrow the South Vietnamese Government. 
Now, what has been the result of these private efforts? For months, the North Vietnamese have been berating us at the public sessions for not responding to their side's publicly presented seven-point plan. 
The truth is that we did respond to the enemy's plan, in the manner they wanted us to respond--secretly. In full possession of our complete response, the North Vietnamese publicly denounced us for not having responded at all. They induced many Americans in the press and the Congress into echoing their propaganda--Americans who could not know they were being falsely used by the enemy to stir up divisiveness in this country. 
I decided in October that we should make another attempt to break the deadlock. I consulted with President Thieu, who concurred fully in a new plan. On October 11, I sent a private communication to the North Vietnamese that contained new elements that could move negotiations forward. I urged a meeting on November 1 between Dr. Kissinger and Special Adviser Le Due Tho, or some other appropriate official from Hanoi. 
On October 25, the North Vietnamese agreed to meet and suggested November 20 as the time for a meeting. On November 17, just 3 days before the scheduled meeting, they said Le Duc Tho was ill. We offered to meet as soon as he recovered, either with him, or immediately with any other authorized leader who could come from Hanoi. 
Two months have passed since they called off that meeting. The only reply to our plan has been an increase in troop infiltration from North Vietnam and Communist military offensives in Laos and Cambodia. Our proposal for peace was answered by a step-up in the war on their part.
That is where matters stand today. 
We are being asked publicly to respond to proposals that we answered, and in some respects accepted, months ago in private. 
We are being asked publicly to set a terminal date for our withdrawals when we already offered one in private. 
And the most comprehensive peace plan of this conflict lies ignored in a secret channel, while the enemy tries again for military victory. 
That is why I have instructed Ambassador Porter to present our plan publicly at this Thursday's session of the Paris peace talks, along with alternatives to make it even more flexible. 
We are publishing the full details of our plan tonight. It will prove beyond doubt which side has made every effort to make these negotiations succeed. It will show unmistakably that Hanoi not Washington or Saigon--has made the war go on. 
Here is the essence of our peace plan; public disclosure may gain it the attention it deserves in Hanoi.
Within 6 months of an agreement:
--We shall withdraw all U.S. and allied forces from South Vietnam.
--We shall exchange all prisoners of war.
--There shall be a cease-fire throughout Indochina.
--There shall be a new presidential election in South Vietnam. 
President Thieu will announce the elements of this election. These include international supervision and an independent body to organize and run the election, representing all political forces in South Vietnam, including the National Liberation Front. 
Furthermore, President Thieu has informed me that within the framework of the agreement outlined above, he makes the following offer: He and Vice President Huong would be ready to resign one month before the new election. The Chairman of the Senate, as caretaker head of the Government, would assume administrative responsibilities in South Vietnam, but the election would be the sole responsibility of the independent election body I have just described. 
There are several other proposals in our new peace plan; for example, as we offered privately on July 26 of last year, we remain prepared to undertake a major re. construction program throughout Indochina, including North Vietnam, to help all these peoples recover from the ravages of a generation of war. 
We will pursue any approach that will speed negotiations. 
We are ready to negotiate the plan I have outlined tonight and conclude a comprehensive agreement on all military and political issues. Because some parts of this agreement could prove more difficult to negotiate than others, we would be willing to begin implementing certain military aspects while negotiations continue on the implementation of other issues, just as we suggested in our private proposal in October. 
Or, as we proposed last May, we remain willing to settle only the military issues and leave the political issues to the Vietnamese alone. Under this approach, we would withdraw all U.S. and allied forces within 6 months in exchange for an Indochina cease-fire and the release of all prisoners.
The choice is up to the enemy. 
This is a settlement offer which is fair to North Vietnam and fair to South Vietnam. It deserves the light of public scrutiny by these nations and by other nations throughout the world. And it deserves the united support of the American people. 
We made the substance of this generous offer privately over 3 months ago. It has not been rejected, but it has been ignored. I reiterate that peace offer tonight. It can no longer be ignored. 
The only thing this plan does not do is to join our enemy to overthrow our ally, which the United States of America will never do. If the enemy wants peace, it will have to recognize the important difference between settlement and surrender. 
This has been a long and agonizing struggle. But it is difficult to see how anyone, regardless of his past position on the war, could now say that we have not gone the extra mile in offering a settlement that is fair, fair to everybody concerned. 
By the steadiness of our withdrawal of troops, America has proved its resolution to end our involvement in the war; by our readiness to act in the spirit of conciliation, America has proved its desire to be involved in the building of a permanent peace throughout Indochina. 
We are ready to negotiate peace immediately. 
If the enemy rejects our offer to negotiate, we shall continue our program of ending American involvement in the war by withdrawing our remaining forces as the South Vietnamese develop the capability to defend themselves. 
If the enemy's answer to our peace offer is to step up their military attacks, I shall fully meet my responsibility as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces to protect our remaining troops.
We do not prefer this course of action.
We want to end the war not only for America but for all the people of Indochina. The plan I have proposed tonight can accomplish that goal. 
Some of our citizens have become accustomed to thinking that whatever our Government says must be false, and whatever our enemies say must be true, as far as this war is concerned. Well, the record I have revealed tonight proves the contrary. We can now demonstrate publicly what we have long been demonstrating privately--that America has taken the initiative not only to end our participation in this war, but to end the war itself for all concerned. 
This has been the longest, the most difficult war in American history. 
Honest and patriotic Americans have disagreed as to whether we should have become involved at all 9 years ago; and there has been disagreement on the conduct of the war. The proposal I have made tonight is one on which we all can agree. 
Let us unite now, unite in our search for peace--a peace that is fair to both sides--a peace that can last



58 - The President's News Conference
February 10, 1972

Perhaps to put it in a clearer context, I was a very vigorous critic of the policies that got us into Vietnam. I was a critic, for example, of the settlement which resulted in the partition of Laos, which opened the Ho Chi Minh Trail and paved the way for the invasion of the South by the North Vietnamese troops. 
I was a critic of the policies and the actions which, I think most observers would agree, contributed to the assassination of Diem3 and the succession of coups which then brought on further armed conflict. I was a strong critic of the conduct of the war before I was a candidate and after I was a candidate. But once I became a candidate and once President Johnson announced he would no longer be a candidate, and the peace talks began, I said then that as far as I was concerned, as a man seeking the Presidency, I would say nothing that would, in any way, jeopardize those peace talks. 



103 - The President's News Conference
March 24, 1972

THE PRESIDENT. What we are really trying to do there, Miss Lewine, and this has been done under my direction, is to break a filibuster. There has been about a 3 1/2-year filibuster at the peace talks on the part of the North Vietnamese. They have refused to negotiate seriously. They have used the talks for the purpose of propaganda while we have been trying to seek peace. Whenever the enemy is ready to negotiate seriously, we are ready to negotiate. And I would emphasize we are ready to negotiate in public channels or in private channels. 
As far as the hopes for a negotiated peace are concerned, I would say that the way the talks were going, there was no hope whatever. I am not saying that this move is going to bring a negotiation. I do say, however, that it was necessary to do something to get the talks off dead center and to see whether the enemy continued to want to use the talks only for propaganda or whether they wanted to negotiate. 
When they are ready, we are ready, but we are not going to continue to allow them to use this forum for the purpose of bully. ragging the United States in a propaganda forum rather than in seriously negotiating peace, as we tried to do as exemplified by not only our private contacts in the 12 meetings that I discussed on January 25, but also in my speech of January 25, in which I made a very forthcoming offer



129 - Address to the Nation on Vietnam.
April 26, 1972

During the past 3 weeks you have been reading and hearing about the massive invasion of South Vietnam by the Communist armies of North Vietnam. 
Tonight, I want to give you a firsthand report on the military situation in Vietnam, the decisions I have made with regard to the role of the United States in the conflict, and the efforts we are making to bring peace at the negotiating table. 
As I reported in my television address to the Nation on January 25, we have offered the most generous peace terms in both public and private negotiating sessions. Our most recent proposal provided for an immediate cease-fire; the exchange of all prisoners of war; the withdrawal of all of our forces within 6 months; and new elections in Vietnam, which would be internationally supervised, with all political elements including the Communists participating in and helping to run the elections. One month before such elections, President Thieu and Vice President Huong would resign. 
Now, Hanoi's answer to this offer was a refusal even to discuss our proposals and, at the same time, a huge escalation of their military activities on the battlefield. Last October, the same month when we made this peace offer to Hanoi, our intelligence reports began to indicate that the enemy was building up for a major attack. And yet we deliberately refrained from responding militarily. Instead we patiently continued with the Paris talks, because we wanted to give the enemy every chance to reach a negotiated settlement at the bargaining table rather than to seek a military victory on the battlefield--a victory they cannotbeallowed to win. 
Finally, 3 weeks ago, on Easter weekend, they mounted their massive invasion of South Vietnam. Three North Vietnamese divisions swept across the demilitarized zone into South Vietnam--in violation of the treaties they had signed in 1954 and in violation of the understanding they had reached with President Johnson in 1968, when he stopped the bombing of North Vietnam in return for arrangements which included their pledge not to violate the DMZ. Shortly after the invasion across the DMZ, another three North Vietnamese divisions invaded South Vietnam further south. As the offensive progressed, the enemy indiscriminately shelled civilian population centers in clear violation of the 1968 bombing halt understanding. 
So the facts are clear. More than 120,000 North Vietnamese are now fighting in South Vietnam. There are no South Vietnamese troops anywhere in North Vietnam. Twelve of North Vietnam's 13 regular combat divisions have now left their own soil in order to carry aggressive war onto the territory of their neighbors. Whatever pretext there was of a civil war in South Vietnam has now been stripped away. 
What we are witnessing here--what is being brutally inflicted upon the people of South Vietnam is a clear case of naked and unprovoked aggression across an international border. There is only one word for it invasion. 
This attack has been resisted on the ground entirely by South Vietnamese forces, and in one area by South Korean forces. There are no United States ground troops involved. None will be involved. To support this defensive effort by the South Vietnamese, I have ordered attacks on enemy military targets in both North and South Vietnam by the air and naval forces of the United States. 
I have here on my desk a report. I received it this morning from General Abrams. He gives the following evaluation of the situation:
 The South Vietnamese are fighting courageously and well in their self-defense. They are inflicting very heavy casualties on the invading force, which has not gained the easy victory some predicted for it 3 weeks ago. 
 Our air strikes have been essential in protecting our own remaining forces and in assisting the South Vietnamese in their efforts to protect their homes and their country from a Communist takeover. 
 General Abrams predicts in this report that there will be several more weeks of very hard fighting. Some battles will be lost, he says; others will be won by the South Vietnamese. But his conclusion is that if we continue to provide air and sea support, the enemy will fail in its desperate gamble to impose a Communist regime in South Vietnam, and the South Vietnamese will then have demonstrated their ability to defend themselves on the ground against future enemy attacks. 
Based on this realistic assessment from General Abrams, and after consultation with President Thieu, Ambassador Bunker, Ambassador Porter, and my senior advisers in Washington, I have three decisions to announce tonight. 
First, I have decided that Vietnamization has proved itself sufficiently that we can continue our program of withdrawing American forces without detriment to our overall goal of ensuring South Vietnam's survival as an independent country. Consequently, I am announcing tonight that over the next e months 20,000 more Americans will be brought home from Vietnam. This decision has the full approval of President Thieu and of General Abrams. It will bring our troop ceiling down to 49,000 by July 1--a reduction of half a million men since this Administration came into office. 
Second, I have directed Ambassador Porter to return to the negotiating table in Paris tomorrow,1 but with one very specific purpose in mind. We are not resuming the Paris talks simply in order to hear more empty propaganda and bombast from the North Vietnamese and Vietcong delegates, but to get on with the constructive business of making peace. We are resuming the Paris talks with the firm expectation that productive talks leading to rapid progress will follow through all available channels. As far as we are concerned, the first order of business will be to get the enemy to halt his invasion of South Vietnam and to return the American prisoners of war. 
Finally, I have ordered that our air and naval attacks on military installations in North Vietnam be continued until the North Vietnamese stop their offensive in South Vietnam. 
I have flatly rejected the proposal that we stop the bombing of North Vietnam as a condition for returning to the negotiating table. They sold that package to the United States once before, in 1968, and we are not going to buy it again in 1972. 
Now, let's look at the record. By July 1 we will have withdrawn over 90 percent of our forces that were in Vietnam in 1969. Before the enemy's invasion began, we had cut our air sorties in half. We have offered exceedingly generous terms for peace. The only thing we have refused to do is to accede to the enemy's demand to overthrow the lawfully constituted Government of South Vietnam and to impose a Communist dictatorship in its place. 
As you will recall, I have warned on a number of occasions over the past 3 years that if the enemy responded to our efforts to bring peace by stepping up the war, I would act to meet that attack, for these three very good reasons: first, to protect our remaining American forces; second, to permit continuation of our withdrawal program; and third, to prevent the imposition of a Communist regime on the people of South Vietnam against their will, with the inevitable bloodbath that would follow for hundreds of thousands who have dared to oppose Communist aggression. 
The air and naval strikes of recent weeks have been carried out to achieve these objectives. They have been directed only against military targets which support the invasion of South Vietnam and they will not stop until the invasion stops. 
The Communists have failed in their efforts to win over the people of South Vietnam politically. And General Abrams believes that they will fail in their efforts to conquer South Vietnam militarily. Their one remaining hope is to win in the Congress of the United States and among the people of the United States the victory they cannot win among the people of South Vietnam or on the battlefield in South Vietnam. 
The great question then is how we, the American people, will respond to this final challenge. 
Let us look at what the stakes are-not just for South Vietnam, but for the United States and for the cause of peace in the world. If one country, armed with the most modern weapons by major powers, can invade another nation and succeed in conquering it, other countries will be encouraged to do exactly the same thing--in the Mideast, in Europe, and in other international danger spots. If the Communists win militarily in Vietnam, the risk of war in other parts of the world would be enormously increased. But if, on the other hand, Communist aggression fails in Vietnam, it will be discouraged elsewhere, and the chance for peace will be increased. 
We are not trying to conquer North Vietnam or any other country in this world. We want no territory. We seek no bases. We have offered the most generous peace terms--peace with honor for both sides--with South Vietnam and North Vietnam each respecting the other's independence. 
But we will not be defeated, and we will never surrender our friends to Communist aggression. 
We have come a long way in this conflict. The South Vietnamese have made great progress; they are now bearing the brunt of the battle. We can now see the day when no more Americans will be involved there at all. 
But as we come to the end of this long and difficult struggle, we must be steadfast. And we must not falter. For all that we have risked and all that we have gained over the years now hangs in the balance during the coming weeks and months. If we now let down our friends, we shall surely be letting down ourselves and our future as well. If we now persist, future generations will thank America for her courage and her vision in this time of testing. 
That is why I say to you tonight, let us bring our men home from Vietnam; let us end the war in Vietnam. But let us end it in such a way that the younger brothers and the sons of the brave men who have fought in Vietnam will not have to fight again in some other Vietnam at some time in the future. 
Any man who sits here in this office feels a profound sense of obligation to future generations. No man who sits here has theright to take any action which would abdicate America's great tradition of world leadership or weaken respect for the Office of President of the United States. 
I do not know who will be in this office in the years ahead. But I do know that future Presidents will travel to nations abroad as I have on journeys for peace. If the United States betrays the millions of people who have relied on us in Vietnam, the President of the United States, whoever he is, will not deserve nor receive the respect which is essential if the United States is to continue to play the great role we are destined to play of helping to build a new structure of peace in the world. It would amount to a renunciation of our morality, an abdication of our leadership among nations, and an invitation for the mighty to prey upon the weak all around the world. It would be to deny peace the chance peace deserves to have. This we shall never do. 
My fellow Americans, let us therefore unite as a nation in a firm and wise policy of real peace--not the peace of surrender, but peace with honor--not just peace in our time, but peace for generations to come.




134 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Guests Following a Dinner at Secretary Connally's Ranch in Floresville, Texas.
April 30, 1972

As General Abrams reported then, and as he has updated his report as of today, the South Vietnamese on the ground are resisting very bravely a massive Communist North Vietnamese invasion of South Vietnam. That invasion will continue. The offensive will continue in its intensity, and we can expect over the next 4 to 5 weeks that there will be some battles lost by the South Vietnamese and some will be won, but it is his professional judgment-General Abrams' professional judgment-that the South Vietnamese will be able to hold and deny to the North Vietnamese their goal, which, of course, is to impose on the people of South Vietnam a Communist government. 
Now to keep it all in perspective, let us understand that when we hear about this town or that one that is under attack, we must remember that as of this time, the North Vietnamese have utterly failed in their ability to rally the South Vietnamese people to their cause. 
We also must remember that despite their moving in on certain territory and in certain towns, that over 90 percent of the people of South Vietnam are still under the Government of South Vietnam, and not under control of the Communists. 
So keeping it in perspective, while we can expect, and should expect, as is always the case in a war of any kind, and particularly a war of this type--we can expect some days when the news may be a South Vietnamese setback, and other days when it will be otherwise. It is the view, the professional view of the man on the spot, best able to judge, that the South Vietnamese will be able to hold, provided-and this comes to what we do-provided the United States continues to furnish the air and naval support that we have been furnishing to stop this invasion. 
Now, without repeating what I said last Wednesday night, but simply to underline it, I would like to make just two or three points quickly, frankly, to this group of friends here in Texas. 
Questions have been raised about the decision that I have made, which is to the effect that as long as the North Vietnamese were conducting an invasion and an offensive in South Vietnam, and were killing South Vietnamese and Americans in South Vietnam, that I would, as Commander in Chief of our Armed Forces, order air and naval strikes on military targets in North Vietnam. 
I realize that that decision has caused considerable controversy in this country. I understand why that would be the case. There are many people who believe that the United States has done enough in South Vietnam, that what we should do is to find a way to get out as quickly as we can, and let whatever the consequences are flow from that, which would mean, of course, a Communist takeover. 
Let me tell you the reasons why I feel that it is vitally important that the United States continue to use its air and naval power against targets in North Vietnam, as well as in South Vietnam, to prevent a Communist takeover and a Communist victory over the people of South Vietnam. 
First, because there are 69,000 Americans still in Vietnam--that will be reduced to 49,000 by the first of July--and I, as Commander ha Chief, have a responsibility to see to it that their fives are adequately protected, and I, of course, will meet that responsibility. 
Second, because as we consider the situation in Vietnam, we must remember that if the North Vietnamese were to take over in South Vietnam, as a result of our stopping our support in the air and on the sea--we have no ground support whatever, there are no American ground forces in action in South Vietnam and none will be--but when we consider that situation, if there were such a takeover, we must consider the consequences. 
There is, first, the consequence to the people of South Vietnam. We look back to what happened historically. In 1954, when the North Vietnamese took over in North Vietnam, the Catholic Bishop of Danang estimated that at least 500,000 people in North Vietnam who had opposed the Communist takeover in the North were either murdered or starved to death in slave labor camps. 
I saw something of that when Mrs. Nixon and I were in there in 1956, when we visited refugee camps where over a million North Vietnamese fled from the Communist tyranny to come to the South. If, at this particular point, the Communists were to take over in South Vietnam, you can imagine what would happen to the hundreds of thousands of South Vietnamese who sided with their own Government and with the United States against the Communists. It would be a bloodbath that would stain the hands of the United States for time immemorial. 
That is bad enough. I know there are some who say we have done enough, what happens to the South Vietnamese at this particular time is something that should not be our concern. We have sacrificed enough for them. So let's put it in terms of the United States alone, and then we really see why the only decision that any man in the position of President of the United States can make is to authorize the necessary air and naval strikes that will prevent a Communist takeover. 
In the event that one country like North Vietnam, massively assisted with the most modem technical weapons by two Communist super powers--in the event that that country is able to invade another country and conquer it, you can see how that pattern would be repeated in other countries throughout the world in the Mideast, in Europe, and in others as well. 
If, on the other hand, that kind of aggression is stopped in Vietnam, and fails there, then it will be discouraged in other parts of the world. Putting it quite directly then, what is on the line in Vietnam is not just peace for Vietnam, but peace in the Mideast, peace in Europe, and peace not just for the 5 or 6 or 7 years immediately ahead of us, but possibly for a long time in the future. 
As I put it last Wednesday night, I want, and all America wants, to end the war in Vietnam. I want, and all Americans want, to bring our men home from Vietnam. But I want, and I believe all Americans want, to bring our men home and to end this war in a way that the younger brothers and the sons of the men who have fought and died in Vietnam won't be fighting in another Vietnam 5 or 10 years from now. That is what this is all about.
THE PRESIDENT. The question is with regard to the targets in North Vietnam, and particularly with regard to the dams and the dikes, which many of the pilots believe would be very effective strategic targets. 
I would say on that score that we have, as you know, authorized strikes, and we have made them over the past 4 weeks, since the Communist offensive began, in the Hanoi-Haiphong area. 
I have also indicated, as this offensive continues, if it does continue, that we will continue to make strikes on military targets throughout North Vietnam. 
Now, the problem that is raised with regard to dams or dikes is that, while it is a strategic target, and indirectly a military target, it would result in an enormous number of civilian casualties. That is something that we want to avoid. It is also something we believe is not needed. 
Just let me say that as far as the targets in North Vietnam are concerned, that we are prepared to use our military and naval strength against military targets throughout North Vietnam, and we believe that the North Vietnamese are taking a very great risk if they continue their offensive in the South. 
I will just leave it there, and they can make their own choice. 
In other words, I believe that we can limit our strikes to military targets without going to targets that involve civilian casualties. That is what we have done, and we can do that in the future, and do the job
Since I have come into office we have withdrawn half a million men from Vietnam. We have offered everything that could be offered except to impose a Communist government on the people of South Vietnam, and their answer has been a massive invasion of South Vietnam by the North. 
Now, under these circumstances, instead of the critics criticizing brave Americans flying dangerous air missions, hitting military targets in North Vietnam and military targets only, instead of criticizing them trying to prevent a Communist takeover, I think they ought to direct a little criticism to the Communists that are trying to keep this war going. That is what they ought to be doing
THE PRESIDENT. The United States has shown restraint such as a great power has never shown in history in its handling of the war in Vietnam. At the present time, however, now that we have gone the extra mile in offering a peace settlement and peace terms, a cease-fire, an exchange of prisoners of war--and Mr. Ross Perot 2 can tell you about some of the things we have gone through there and the barbarism with which our prisoners of war are treated. We have offered a total withdrawal of all our forces within 6 months. President Thieu has offered to resign a month before a new election that would be internationally supervised in which the Communists would participate in the election, participate in the supervisory body. 
2 H. Ross Perot, a Texas businessman, headed United We Stand, a private organization formed to call attention to the plight of American prisoners of war. In 1969, as part of efforts to improve the treatment of the POW's, he attempted unsuccessfully to deliver Christmas packages to American prisoners in North Vietnam. 
Having offered all that, and then faced with this invasion, certainly the least the United States can do--and that is all that I have ordered--is to use our air and sea power to hit military targets in North Vietnam. That is what we have done and that is what we are going to continue to do until they stop their invasion of South Vietnam




147 - Address to the Nation on the Situation in Southeast Asia.
May 8, 1972

Five weeks ago, on Easter weekend, the Communist armies of North Vietnam launched a massive invasion of South Vietnam, an invasion that was made possible by tanks, artillery, and other advanced offensive weapons supplied to Hanoi by the Soviet Union and other Communist nations. 
The South Vietnamese have fought bravely to repel this brutal assault. Casualties on both sides have been very high. Most tragically, there have been over 20,000 civilian casualties, including women and children, in the cities which the North Vietnamese have shelled in wanton disregard of human life. 
As I announced in my report to the Nation 12 days ago, the role of the United States in resisting this invasion has been limited to air and naval strikes on military targets in North and South Vietnam. As I also pointed out in that report, we have responded to North Vietnam's massive military offensive by undertaking wide-ranging new peace efforts aimed at ending the war through negotiation. 
I authorized Dr. Kissinger to meet privately with the top North Vietnamese negotiator, Le Duc Tho, on Tuesday, May 2, in Paris. Ambassador Porter, as you know, resumed the public peace negotiations in Paris on April 27 and again on May 4. At those meetings, both public and private, all we heard from the enemy was bombastic rhetoric and a replaying of their demands for surrender. For example, at the May 2 secret meeting, I authorized Dr. Kissinger to talk about every conceivable avenue toward peace. The North Vietnamese flatly refused to consider any of these approaches. They refused to offer any new approach of their own. Instead, they simply read verbatim their previous public demands. 
Here is what over 3 years of public and private negotiations with Hanoi has come down to: The United States, with the full concurrence of our South Vietnamese allies, has offered the maximum of what any President of the United States could offer. 
We have offered a deescalation of the fighting. We have offered a cease-fire with a deadline for withdrawal of all American forces. We have offered new elections which would be internationally supervised with the Communists participating both in the supervisory body and in the elections themselves. 
President Thieu has offered to resign one month before the elections. We have offered an exchange of prisoners of war in a ratio of 10 North Vietnamese prisoners for every one American prisoner that they release. And North Vietnam has met each of these offers with insolence and insult. They have flatly and arrogantly refused to negotiate an end to the war and bring peace. Their answer to every peace offer we have made has been to escalate the war. 
In the 2 weeks alone since I offered to resume negotiations, Hanoi has launched three new military offensives in South Vietnam. In those 2 weeks the risk that a Communist government may be imposed on the 17 million people of South Vietnam has increased, and the Communist offensive has now reached the point that it gravely threatens the lives of 60,000 American troops who are still in Vietnam. 
There are only two issues left for us in this war. First, in the face of a massive invasion do we stand by, jeopardize the lives of 60,000 Americans, and leave the South Vietnamese to a long night of terror? This will not happen. We shall do whateverisrequired to safeguard American lives and American honor. 
Second, in the face of complete intransigence at the conference table do we join with our enemy to install a Communist government in South Vietnam? This, too, will not happen. We will not cross the line from generosity to treachery. 
We now have a clear, hard choice among three courses of action: Immediate withdrawal of all American forces, continued attempts at negotiation, or decisive military action to end the war. 
I know that many Americans favor the first course of action, immediate withdrawal. They believe the way to end the war is for the United States to get out, and to remove the threat to our remaining forces by simply withdrawing them. 
From a political standpoint, this would be a very easy choice for me to accept. After all, I did not send over one-half million Americans to Vietnam. I have brought 500,000 men home from Vietnam since I took office. But, abandoning ourcommitment in Vietnam here and now would mean turning 17 million South Vietnamese over to Communist tyranny and terror. It would mean leaving hundreds of American prisoners in Communist hands with no bargaining leverage to get them released. 
An American defeat in Vietnam would encourage this kind of aggression all over the world, aggression in which smaller nations armed by their major allies, could be tempted to attack neighboring nations at will in the Mideast, in Europe, and other areas. World peace would be in grave jeopardy. 
The second course of action is to keep on trying to negotiate a settlement. Now this is the course we have preferred from the beginning and we shall continue to pursue it. We want to negotiate, but we have made every reasonable offer and tried every possible path for ending this war at the conference table. 
The problem is, as you all know, it takes two to negotiate and now, as throughout the past 4 years, the North Vietnamese arrogantly refuse to negotiate anything but an imposition, an ultimatum that the United States impose a Communist regime on 17 million people in South Vietnam who do not want a Communist government. 
It is plain then that what appears to be a choice among three courses of action for the United States is really no choice at all. The killing in this tragic war must stop. By simply getting out, we would only worsen the bloodshed. By relying solely on negotiations, we would give an intransigent enemy the time he needs to press his aggression on the battlefield. 
There is only one way to stop the killing. That is to keep the weapons of war out of the hands of the international outlaws of North Vietnam. 
Throughout the war in Vietnam, the United States has exercised a degree of restraint unprecedented in the annals of war. That was our responsibility as a great Nation, a Nation which is interested-and we can be proud of this as Americans-as America has always been, in peace not conquest. 
However, when the enemy abandons all restraint, throws its whole army into battle in the territory of its neighbor, refuses to negotiate, we simply face a new situation. 
In these circumstances, with 60,000 Americans threatened, any President who failed to act decisively would have betrayed the trust of his country and betrayed the cause of world peace. 
I therefore concluded that Hanoi must be denied the weapons and supplies it needs to continue the aggression. In full coordination with the Republic of Vietnam, I have ordered the following measures which are being implemented as I am speaking to you. 
All entrances to North Vietnamese ports will be mined to prevent access to these ports and North Vietnamese naval operations from these ports. United States forces have been directed to take appropriate measures within the internal and claimed territorial waters of North Vietnam to interdict the delivery of any supplies. Rail and all other communications will be cut off to the maximum extent possible. Air and naval strikes against military targets in North Vietnam will continue. 
These actions are not directed against any other nation. Countries with ships presently in North Vietnamese ports have already been notified that their ships will have three daylight periods to leave in safety. After that time, the mines will become active and any ships attempting to leave or enter these ports will do so at their own risk. 
These actions I have ordered will cease when the following conditions are met: 
First, all American prisoners of war must be returned. 
Second, there must be an internationally supervised cease-fire throughout Indochina. 
Once prisoners of war are released, once the internationally supervised cease-fire has begun, we will stop all acts of force throughout Indochina, and at that time we will proceed with a complete withdrawal of all American forces from Vietnam within 4 months. 
Now, these terms are generous terms. They are terms which would not require surrender and humiliation on the part of anybody. They would permit the United States to withdraw with honor. They would end the killing. They would bring our POW's home. They would allow negotiations on a political settlement between the Vietnamese themselves. They would permit all the nations which have suffered in this long war--Cambodia, Laos, North Vietnam, South Vietnam-to turn at last to the urgent works of healing and of peace. They deserve immediate acceptance by North Vietnam. 
It is appropriate to conclude my remarks tonight with some comments directed individually to each of the major parties involved in the continuing tragedy of the Vietnam war. 
First, to the leaders of Hanoi, your people have already suffered too much in your pursuit of conquest. Do not compound their agony with continued arrogance; choose instead the path of a peace that redeems your sacrifices, guarantees true independence for your country, and ushers in an era of reconciliation. 
To the people of South Vietnam, you shall continue to have our firm support in your resistance against aggression. It is your spirit that will determine the outcome of the battle. It is your will that will shape the future of your country. 
To other nations, especially those which are allied with North Vietnam, the actions I have announced tonight are not directed against you. Their sole purpose is to protect the lives of 60,000 Americans, who would be gravely endangered in the event that the Communist offensive continues to roll forward, and to prevent the imposition of a Communist government by brutal aggression upon 17 million people. 
Let us not slide back toward the dark shadows of a previous age. We do not ask you to sacrifice your principles, or your friends, but neither should you permit Hanoi's intransigence to blot out the prospects we together have so patiently prepared. 
You want peace. I want peace. But, you also want honor and not defeat. You want a genuine peace, not a peace that is merely a prelude to another war. 
At this moment, we must stand together in purpose and resolve. As so often in the past, we Americans did not choose to resort to war. It has been forced upon us by an enemy that has shown utter contempt toward every overture we have made for peace. And that is why, my fellow Americans, tonight I ask for your support of this decision, a decision which has only one purpose, not to expand the war, not to escalate the war, but to end this war and to win the kind of peace that will last. 



214 - The President's News Conference
June 29, 1972

On the negotiating front, we 'have informed the North Vietnamese, after consultation with the Government of Vietnam, that we will return to the negotiating table in Paris on April [July] 13, Thursday; we have been informed by the North Vietnamese and the Vietcong, that they, too, will return on that date. We have returned to the negotiating table, or will return to it on the assumption that the North Vietnamese are prepared to negotiate in a constructive and serious way. We will be prepared to negotiate in that way. If those negotiations go forward in a constructive and serious way, this war can be ended, and it can be ended well before January 20. If they do not go forward on that basis, the United States will continue to meet its commitments. Our bombing, as far as that is concerned, our mining, is for the purpose only of preventing Communist aggression from succeeding, to protect the remaining Americans, 40,000 or so, that are still in Vietnam, and to have some bargaining position in getting our POW's back. 
One last point with regard to the POW's: I know that every American is concerned about these men. I have been somewhat concerned about them. I will only say that I have had some experience, and a great deal of experience as a matter of fact in this past year, in dealing with Communist leaders. I find that making a bargain with them is not easy, and you get something from them only when you have something they want to get from you. The only way we are going to get our POW's back is to be doing something to them, and that means hitting military targets in North Vietnam, retaining a residual force in South Vietnam, and continuing the mining of the harbors of North Vietnam. 
Only by having that kind of activity go forward will they have any incentive to return our POW's rather than not to account for them as was the case when the French got out of Vietnam in 1954 and 15,000 French were never accounted for after that.2 
I shall never have that happen to the brave men who are POW's
THE PRESIDENT. It did not affect the diplomatic negotiations. As a matter of fact, a meeting took place, a private meeting, between Dr. Kissinger and the negotiators in Paris on May 2, during the period that General Lavelle's activities were being undertaken,3 and you can be very sure that had the North Vietnamese wanted any pretext to complain about, they would have complained about that particular matter. 
As far as this is concerned, as Admiral Moorer testified today, it wasn't authorized. It was directed against only those military targets which were the areas that were being used for firing on American planes, but since it did exceed authorization, it was proper for him to be relieved and retired. And I think that it was the proper action to take. And I believe that will assure that that kind of activity may not occur in the future. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Jarriel [Tom Jarriel, ABC News], to date the effect of the mining and also the bombing of the military targets in North Vietnam--particularly the railroads and the oil supplies--the situation in Vietnam has been completely turned around. I was looking at some news magazines that came out the week before the mining was ordered, and I noted that each one of them has as its heading, "The specter of defeat in Vietnam." That was the situation when we started it. 
It has been turned around. The South Vietnamese are now on the offensive. It is not over. We expect, perhaps, some more North Vietnamese offensive, but I believe that now the ability of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves on the ground, with the support that we give them in the air, has been demonstrated. Their ability to defend themselves in Anloc and Kontum, and now in the area of Hue, is an indication that Vietnamization, as far as their ground activity is concerned, has proved to be a successful action. Now, as far as the future is concerned, I have already indicated that we will be returning to negotiations in July. That is the important area to watch at this time, as well as the battlefield. And as far as any future announcements are concerned, that will depend upon progress at the negotiating table and on the battle front. 
THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Rather, we have checked those reports. They have proved to be inaccurate. The bombing of dikes is something, as you will recall from the gentleman who asked the question in Texas,4 was something that some people have advocated. The United States has used great restraint in its bombing policy and, I think, properly so. We have tried to hit only military targets and we have been hitting military targets. We have had orders out not to hit dikes because the result in terms of civilian casualties would be extraordinary. 
As far as any future activities are concerned, those orders still are in force. I do notintendtoallow any orders to go out which would involve civilian casualties if they can be avoided. Military targets only will be allowed. 
First, as far as the ground activities are concerned, they are being entirely undertaken by the South Vietnamese. American ground combat action has totally been finished in Vietnam. As far as Americans in Vietnam are concerned, this war is over in the future for any future draftees. No more draftees will be sent to Vietnam. 
What happened in this case was that the North Vietnamese launched a massive offensive with huge tanks, bigger than those against which they were arrayed, with new and modern weapons. In order to provide an equalizer, and it was needed, we provided air support. 
Finally, the success of our airstrikes on the North and on the battlefield, the success in turning this battle around hastens the day when the South Vietnamese will be able to undertake the total activity themselves. 
I am not going to put a date on it. I can only say the outcome of the present battle, how badly the North Vietnamese are hurt, will determine it, but I am very optimistic on this point
THE PRESIDENT. No, there are no conditions attached to either side. We are going back to the talks prepared to negotiate without conditions, which we think is the most constructive way to obtain results. For example, the condition--I assume this is the implication of your question-there was no condition that if we would go back to the talks we would stop the bombing. We do not intend to. We will stop the bombing when the conditions are met that I laid out in my May 8 speech. 
In my May 8 speech, Mr. Lisagor, as you recall, I laid down three conditions. I said that we were bombing military targets in the North, that we were mining the harbor, and that we were doing so for three purposes: to prevent the imposition of a Communist government in South Vietnam, to protect our remaining forces in South Vietnam, which were then 60,000, and, in addition, for the purpose of obtaining the release of our POW's. 
Those are the three conditions that we have as far as the bombing is concerned. 
But we are prepared to negotiate on those points with the enemy. We have no desire to continue the bombing for one moment longer than necessary to accomplish what we consider to be these very minimal objectives
THE PRESIDENT. I am not sure that my evaluation of the history is the same as yours. My own view is that we have tried every device possible over the past 3 years to get negotiations going. We have withdrawn forces, we have made very forthcoming offers, we have wound down combat activities on our part, and the result has been simply an ever increasing intransigence on the part of the enemy. 
Believe me, it was only as a last resort that I made the very difficult decision of May 8, knowing how much rode on that decision, but having made that decision, I think it was theright decision. And I think the fact that our summit meetings went ahead despite that decision, the fact that we are going back to the negotiating table despite that decision, indicates that it may be that those who feel that a strong hand at the negotiating table is one that results in nonegotiation may be wrong. 
It has always been my theory that in dealing with these very pragmatic men-and we must respect them for their strength and their pragmatism who lead the Communist nations, that they respect strength, not belligerence but strength, and at least that is the way I am always going to approach it, and I think it is going to be successful in the end




239 - The President's News Conference
July 27, 1972

THE PRESIDENT. I think your question perhaps could be better answered by my discussing the policy toward bombing of civilian installations in North Vietnam generally, and then coming down to the specifics of your question, in giving the general answer. 
Some of you who were in Texas with me will recall that that question was raised at the Connally Ranch1 and it was raised, actually, by an advocate of bombing dikes as to why we did not bomb dikes. And I said it had not been U.S. policy even before the bombing halt of 1968 to bomb the dikes, that it was not our policy now, that it would not be in the future, because it is the policy of the United States in all of its activities against North Vietnam to direct its attacks against military targets only. 
That was the policy in the sixties, and it is now the policy since we have had to resume the bombing for the purposes that I mentioned in my speech of May 8. 
Now with regard to the situation on the dikes, let us understand what we are confronted with here. This is approximately a 2,700-mile chain of installations, including perhaps a half-dozen major dams which are the heart of the system and then peripheral areas getting down to mounds, which have, of course, the purpose of controlling the floodwaters in that particular area. 
If it were the policy of the United States to bomb the dikes, we could take them out, the significant part of them out, in a week. We don't do so for the reasons that I have mentioned, because we are trying to avoid civilian casualties, not cause them. 
Now, with regard to the reports, reports that have come from Hanoi that there had been some damage to some parts of the dike system, I think it is important to note two things: One, there has been no report of any flooding; second, there has been no report of any strikes on the major dike areas. 
What I am referring to is the big dams which are the heart of the system. There have been reports of incidental damage to some of the peripheral installations in this 2,700-mile system which covers the country of North Vietnam. 
Now, under these circumstances, I think that it is well to keep in context, first, what our policy is, and second, what its effect has been. Our policy is not to bomb civilian installations, and second, our restraint, it seems to me, rather than being subject to criticisms should be subject to objective analysis and, it seems to me, a considerable amount of support. 
As far as this matter is concerned, I think, too, itistime to strip away the double standard. I noted with interest that the Secretary General of the U.N., just like his predecessor, seized upon this enemy-inspired propaganda, which has taken in many well-intentioned and naive people, to attack what he called the American bombing of civilian installations and risking civilian lives, and yet not raising one word against deliberate bombing of civilian installations in South Vietnam. 
Now just so the record will be kept straight--and it should be stated at this point--all of you ladies and gentlemen, of course, are aware of it, and you have printed it, and perhaps you will see fit to again in this context: 
I just got a cable from Ambassador Bunker. I had asked him what had happened to civilians in the new offensive. You recall in my speech of May 8, I said that 20,000 civilian casualties, including women and children, had resulted because of the deliberate shelling of the cities and the slaughtering of refugees indiscriminately by the North Vietnamese. 
The number is now 45,000, including women and children, of which 15,000 are dead. 
I asked him for the number of refugees. It is higher than I had thought. There have been 860,000 made homeless by the North Vietnamese invasion of South Vietnam, this newest invasion to date; 600, 000 of them are still in refugee camps, away from their homes. 
Looking back over the period of this very difficult war, we find that since 1965 there have been 600,000 civilian casualties in South Vietnam as a result of deliberate policy of the North Vietnamese Communists, not accidental, but deliberate. 
And in North Vietnam, in the period from 1954 to 1956, in their so-called land reform program, a minimum of 50,000 were murdered, assassinated, and--according to the Catholic Bishop of Danang, whom I talked to when I was there in 1956 in South Vietnam--in addition to the 800,000 refugees who came south, there were at least a half million who died in slave labor camps in North Vietnam. 
Now, I do not relate this series of incidents for the purpose of saying, because they did something bad, we can do something bad. 
What I am simply saying is, let's not have a hypocritical double standard. The United States has been restrained-greater restraint than any great power has ever shown--in handling this war. We will continue to be restrained. We have to do what is necessary against military targets in order to accomplish the objectives that I have described in my goal in my speech of May 8. 
But on the other hand, as far as this particular matter is concerned, I can only say that if damage did occur that we are making every possible effort to see that it will not occur again, which gets to your question. Military commanders, aircraft commanders, and so forth, in terms of where military targets are, are instructed to avoid civilian damage where they can. 
That is why some targets in the heart of Hanoi for example, major power installations, fuel installations, in the heart of Hanoi--have not been hit, because I have not wanted to have civilian casualties if we could possibly avoid it. 
I will simply close by saying that this is a major propaganda campaign; it is one that does concern us. But let us keep the record straight. In the event that the United States followed the course of action recommended by some of those who have voted for the so-called End the War Resolution in the Senate of the United States, it would mean that there would be visited upon South Vietnam the same atrocities that were visited upon North Vietnam, with perhaps at least a million marked for assassination because they had fought against the North Vietnamese attempt to conquer South Vietnam. 
I will add one other thing. As far as the negotiations are concerned, we are negotiating. We have negotiated in public. We have had one private conference a week ago, lasting approximately 6 hours. We hope to continue to negotiate. 
We have made fair offers on withdrawal, on cease-fire, on political settlement. We have not made them on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. 
We made fair offers on exchange of prisoners of war and accounting for missing in action every place in Southeast Asia. 
But having done this, there is one thing that we have not offered--and this is the one hang-up in the settlement today--and that is the demand of the enemy indirectly or directly to do what they cannot accomplish themselves: impose a Communist government in South Vietnam. That would be the height of immorality, to impose on the 17 million people of South Vietnam a Communist government with the bloodbath that would follow. 
THE PRESIDENT. That is a very perceptive question, but it is one that I think any of you here would agree that I should not comment upon for the reason that negotiations are now underway. I have read these long negotiating sessions--the public ones, of course, and even more important, the private ones--in great detail. At a time that matters are being discussed, it is not well for me to state anything with regard to what is happening in the negotiations. 
I will only say that we are negotiating with the desire of ending this war as soon as possible. The fastest way to end the war and the best way to end it is through negotiation. We would hope that public figures in their comments will not do anything to undercut the negotiations, that Congress, in its actions, will not in effect give a message to the enemy, "Don't negotiate with the present Administration; wait for us; we will give you what you want--South Vietnam." 
THE PRESIDENT. I have seen those reports, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News]. As you know, the Secretary of Defense has made some indirect comment about it. The situation there is one that we would lean against the taking out of SAM sites on targets that would result in civilian casualties of a substantial amount. 
However, I have not seen in recent days any reports indicating that any such SAM sites have been hit, and in view of the present debate, I think we are going to be very careful with regard to hitting them. We would do so only if we had to do so in order to protect American fliers who otherwise would be hit down by the SAM's
THE PRESIDENT. I did not use the word "naive" unintentionally. The North Vietnamese are very skillful at propaganda. They have, of course, brought those who have been invited into the country to the areas where they have found bomb damage. They have not gone to any great pains to fill those holes, which they would naturally want to do before the possibility of rain and flood again comes to the North. 
In my view, this is a deliberate attempt on the part of the North Vietnamese to create an extraneous issue, to divert attention from one of the most barbaric invasions in history, compounded by a violation of all concepts of international law in handling the prisoners of war. For them, with their policy of deliberate murder and assassination and otherwise attacks on civilians for the purpose of killing civilians, for them to try to seize on this and divert attention from them, first, to me it is a patent propaganda effort, and it is one that I think needs to be answered
Now, in our case we have not gone that far. We are not going to bomb civilian targets in the North. We are not using the great power that could finish off North Vietnam in an afternoon, and we will not. But it would be the height of immorality for the United States at this point to leave Vietnam, and in leaving, to turn over to the North Vietnamese the fate of 17 million South Vietnamese who do not want a Communist government, to turn it over to them. 
That is what this is about. That is the only issue that is left. Those who say "End the war" really should name their resolution "Prolong the war." They should name it "Prolong the war" not because they deliberately want to. They want to end the war just as I do, but we have to face this fact: We have only one President at a time, as I said in 1968. At that time, as you may recall, I was pressed quite often by you ladies and gentlemen, "What do you think we ought to do about negotiations?" I didn't think there was much chance for successful negotiations then. 
But I said, I thought quite correctly, we have only one President, and I didn't want to destroy any chance he might have to end this war. At this point, the chance for a negotiated settlement is better now than it has ever been. Oh, it is not sure, and I am not going to raise any false hopes, but the enemy is failing in its military offensive, although there is still some hard fighting to take place in the Quangtri-Hue area, but the enemy also is, of course, suffering the consequences of our mining action and in cutting the roads and the other systems that would bring in supplies to North Vietnam. 
Under these circumstances, the enemy-because also we have made a very fair offer--has every incentive to negotiate. But when you put yourself in the position of the enemy, and then they hear that the Congress of the United States says, in effect, "We will give you what you want regardless of what the President has offered," why not wait? This is the problem, and I would hope that as Senators and Congressmen consult their conscience, they would realize that we have just 3 months left before the election. In those 3 months we hope to do everything we can to bring this war to an end, and they should take no action which would jeopardize those negotiations. I can only say that the resolutions to this point cannot help. They can only confuse the enemy at best, and at the worst, they will prolong the war.




267 - Remarks at the American Legion's Annual National Convention in Chicago, Illinois.
August 24, 1972

They are gallant men. They are not ashamed of their country. They are brave men who did not desert their Nation. They are heroes who will stand just as tall as those who fought at Normandy and Iwo Jima. America is not going to turn her back on them. We are not going to make a mockery of their sacrifice and devotion by talking of amnesty for deserters while some of their comrades are held captive in brutal North Vietnamese prisons. 
What they fought for and what we seek today is a true generation of peace, not a short and humiliating truce that will encourage aggression and have the effect of rewarding the foes of freedom. I know that many say that the journey to such a peace is long, and of course it is. But it is a journey that we have begun. We have begun it in opening a new relationship with the world's most populous country, the People's Republic of China. We have begun it in our negotiations with the Soviet Union. I have gone to the four corners of the earth, including even other countries that a President never visited before




276 - The President's News Conference
August 29, 1972

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Potter [Philip Potter, Baltimore Sun], as I also told Mr. Alsop, as you noted, in that interview, I did not indicate to him that any breakthrough had occurred in the negotiations that have been taking place between Dr. Kissinger and Mr. Le Duc Tho at this point. Now, let me divide the answer into its component parts, if I may. 
First, with regard to negotiations, I will not comment on past negotiations. I will not comment upon any negotiations that may take place in the future. By agreement of both sides, we are not going to comment, either the other side or we on our part, on the substance of negotiations or whether or when or what will happen in the future. All that we will do is to announce, after negotiations do take place, if they do--and I do not suggest that more will occur--we will announce the fact that they have taken place. 
Second, with regard to what the prospects are, I think what we are all referring to is that this long and difficult war--long and difficult and costly for both sides-has reached a point where it should be brought to an end. We have made every reasonable negotiating proposal that we can. We are being very reasonable in the proposals that we have made in our various discussions with the other side. Also, with regard to the battlefront, it is significant to note that the South Vietnamese, by heroic efforts, have stopped the invasion from the North on the ground, and they have done that without our assistance on the ground. 
It is also significant to note that the enemy at this point, while it is able to launch a spurt here and there, does not have the capability or has not demonstrated the capability to overrun South Vietnam. 
Now, under these circumstances, we believe that this is the time for a negotiated settlement. If the enemy does not feel that way, then we are prepared to go on as we have indicated, to continue the training of the South Vietnamese--we have completed virtually the ground training because they are undertaking the ground fighting entirely by themselves-but to continue the training in the air and on the sea so that they, by themselves, can defend their country against the Communist invaders from the North. 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't imagine that Mr. Ziegler didn't make everything perfectly clear. [Laughter] But I shall try to, under those circumstances. The announcement of 27,500 [27,000] does not indicate that 27,500 [27,000] is the force that is going to remain in South Vietnam indefinitely. We are going to look at the situation again before the first of December, after the election, incidentally, because we are not going to play election politics with this next withdrawal--or this next announcement, I should say, because I am not suggesting that there will be another withdrawal. 
We will look at the situation, and the three principles that I have always applied with regard to withdrawals will in this case control it: the status of our POW and MIA situation, the status with regard to negotiations, and the status of enemy activity. At that time we will determine what the American force level should be. It should be noted that the present force level of 39,000, and the level that we will reach of 27,500 [27,000] involves no ground combat personnel. It involves only advisory and training personnel and, of course, air support personnel. It is entirely a volunteer force. 
I will add something that perhaps everyone here is quite aware of: that as far as any so-called residual force is concerned, our offer is for a total withdrawal. We want to withdraw all American forces, but that offer is conditioned on what I laid down on May 8, and one of those conditions is the situation with regard to our POW's and MIA's. As long as there is one POW in North Vietnam, or one missing in action, not accounted for, there will be an American volunteer force in South Vietnam. 
As far as what can happen in the future, I know that there are those who believe-I noted some report out of the Air Force to the effect that we probably would be bombing in North Vietnam 2 or 3 years from now. That, of course, is quite ridiculous. As far as the future is concerned, we believe that our training program for the South Vietnamese, not only on the ground but in the air, has gone forward so successfully that if the enemy still refuses to negotiate, as we have asked them to negotiate, then the South Vietnamese will be able to undertake the total defense of their country. 
THE PRESIDENT. Absolutely not. I have noted some press speculation to the effect that since 1968, the bombing halt seemed to have a rather dramatic effect on the election chances of Senator Humphrey-Vice President Humphrey, now a Senator-that people have suggested that as a gimmick, or more or less as an election-eve tactic, that we would call a bombing halt even though our prisoners of war are not accounted for. No progress has been made there, and even though the enemy continued its activities and was still stonewalling us in the negotiations, unless there is progress on the negotiating front which is substantial, there will be no reduction of the bombing of North Vietnam and there will be no lifting of the mining. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think that the answer I gave to the other question is as responsive as I can make it. We always, of course, set our goals high. We do our very best to reach those goals. I think there are those who have faulted this Administration on its efforts to seek peace, but those who fault it, I would respectfully suggest, are ones that would have the United States seek peace at the cost of surrender, dishonor, and the destruction of the ability of the United States to conduct foreign policy in a responsible way. 
That I did not pledge in 1968. I do not pledge it now. We will seek peace. We will seek better relations with our adversaries, but we are going to keep the United States strong. We are going to resist the efforts of those who would cut our defense budget to make us second to any power in the world, and second particularly to the Soviet Union, and in order to do that, it means that we have to continue the responsible policy that we have carried out. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I would not comment on what the situation will be a year from now because, with the fact that we have had negotiation proposals made--I am not indicating progress, I am simply indicating they have been made--and with also the progress that is being made by the South Vietnamese, very outstanding progress in their ability to defend themselves and also to undertake the air effort as well as the ground effort, I am not going to put any limitation on when the U.S. activities in the air would stop. 
Also, I am not going to indicate they are going to continue for any length of time. We are going to continue to watch the situation month by month. We will do what is necessary to protect our interests. We will do what is necessary to assure the return of our POW's and accounting for our missing in action. We will do what is necessary to prevent the imposition, against their will, of a Communist government on the people of South Vietnam. 
All this we will do, but on the other hand, we are not there for the purpose of staying any moment that is longer than is necessary



315 - Remarks at a Buffet Dinner at the Texas Ranch of John B. Connally.
September 22, 1972

In order to stop the Communist invasion of South Vietnam, it was necessary to do something and do it effectively. I decided that we had to mine the harbors of Haiphong and bomb military installations in North Vietnam. There was much disagreement within the Administration, honest disagreement. Some wavered. But John Connally was like a rock. He is the kind of man that you really wanted in such a crisis



317 - Remarks to Members of Young Labor for Nixon.
September 23, 1972

Also, I have made some very hard decisions in the conduct of foreign policy. One of the hardest was the one I made on May 8, when a massive Communist invasion took place of South Vietnam, where the Communists moved into the South, and where, in order to protect the 50,000 Americans that were there and in order to prevent the Communist imposition of a government on the people of South Vietnam, I ordered the mining of the harbors of Haiphong and the bombing of military targets in North Vietnam



327 - Remarks at a "Victory '72" Luncheon in San Francisco, California.
September 27, 1972

We worked on those problems. We have worked on them long and hard. We have not had total success, but we have had significant success. You all know that as far as the war in Vietnam is concerned that we not only have brought home over a half-million, we have not only reduced our casualties, but we have also now ended the American ground combat role. We have prepared the South Vietnamese so that they have demonstrated the ability to stop a major invasion of the Communists from the North, and we have done this without staining the honor of the United States of America. We have maintained the respect for the United States of America



338 - The President's News Conference
October 5, 1972

THE PRESIDENT. The settlement will come just as soon as we can possibly get a settlement which is right--right for the South Vietnamese, the North Vietnamese, and for us--one that will have in mind our goals of preventing the imposition by force of a Communist government on South Vietnam and, of course, a goal that is particularly close to our hearts in a humanitarian sense, the return of our prisoners of war. 
I should emphasize, however, that under no circumstances will the timing of a settlement, for example, the possible negotiation of a cease-fire, the possible negotiation of, or unilateral action with regard to, a bombing halt--under no circumstances will such action be affected by the fact that there is going to be an election November 7. 
If we can make theright kind of a settlement before the election, we will make it. If we cannot, we are not going to make the wrong kind of a settlement before the election. We were around that track in 1968 when well-intentioned men made a very, very great mistake in stopping the bombing without adequate agreements from the other side. 
The election, I repeat, will not in any way influence what we do at the negotiating table. 
Second, because I know this subject has been discussed by a number of you, as it should be, in your commentary and in your reports, the negotiations at this time, as you know, have been, in the private channel, very extensive. We have agreed that neither side will discuss the content of those negotiations. I will not discuss them one way or another. 
I will only say that the negotiations am in a sensitive stage. I cannot predict and will not predict that they will or will not succeed. I cannot and will not predict when they will succeed. 
But I will say that any comment on my part with regard to how the negotiations are going could only have a detrimental effect on the goal that we are seeking, and that is, as early as possible a negotiated settlement of this long and difficult war. 
THE PRESIDENT. They could be motivated by that. There are those who believe that they were motivated to an extent in 1968 by political considerations in agreeing to a bombing halt before the election with the thought that defeating me was more in their interest than electing my opponent. 
Now, as far as Hanoi's putting their eggs in that basket, that only indicates that the American political scene is one that no one can predict. Despite what the polls say and despite some indications on our side that we believe we have a good chance to win, there are many in this country and many abroad who think that there is a chance the other side might win. 
Under those circumstances, they obviously could conclude, with some justification, that my insistence that we will never agree to a settlement which would impose a Communist government directly or indirectly on the people of South Vietnam, as compared with the statements of our opponents to the contrary on this particular point, might be influencing them. 
On the other hand, we are talking. If we have the opportunity, we will continue to talk before this election and we will try to convince them that waiting until after the election is not good strategy. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think, Mr. Lisagor [Peter Lisagor, Chicago Daily News], you could really go further. There are those who say that the bombing and the mining have served no useful purpose and are serving no useful purpose. Those same critics, however, as I pointed out in San Clemente, and have since had an opportunity to review, on May 1, that weekend, all had reached the conclusion that South Vietnam was down the tube. Time, Newsweek, the New York Times, the Washington Post, the three television network commentators--I am not referring, of course, to you ladies and gentlemen who are reporters--all in varying degrees wrote and spoke of the specter of defeat and the hopelessness of the South Vietnamese cause. 
On May 8, I acted to prevent that Communist takeover, which all of these same critics then predicted. After I took that action of mining and bombing, the same critics predicted that the summit was torpedoed. Some even went so far as to say we were risking World War III. 
Those predictions proved to be wrong. Now these same critics say that the bombing and mining was not necessary, it has accomplished no purpose, and is not necessary for the future. Well, I would say, based on their track record, I would not give much credence to what the critics have said in this respect. 
I will only say the bombing and mining was essential to turn around what was a potentially disastrous situation in South Vietnam. The back of the enemy offensive has been broken. They hold no provincial capitals now at all. 
This could not have been accomplished without the mining and the bombing, and the mining and the bombing will continue, of course, until we get some agreements on the negotiating front



342 - Remarks at a Columbus Day Dinner.
October 8, 1972

Also, I recall in May of this year when I had to make a very hard decision, one that I felt was essential, essential to protect American fighting men, essential also to help to bring to an end the long and difficult war in Vietnam in an honorable way, when I had to order the mining of the harbors of Haiphong and order the bombing of military installations in North Vietnam. When I did that, let me say again, that in attempting to enlist support for that very hard decision, it was not necessary for me to call these men. They called and offered their support. For this I am most grateful



351 - Remarks to a Meeting of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia.
October 16, 1972

At that time, a massive Communist invasion took place of South Vietnam from North Vietnam. We were faced with the specter of defeat. And I had to make a choice, a choice of accepting that defeat and going to Moscow hat in hand, or of acting to prevent it. I acted.
As you recall, I made the decision to mine the harbors, to bomb military targets in North Vietnam. That decision was theright decision militarily. It has been effective. And those who predicted that it would lead to the dissolution of the summit and its failure proved to be wrong



375 - Remarks in Ashland, Kentucky.
October 26, 1972
Let me say to you tonight that on May 8, when I made the difficult decision of mining the harbors of North Vietnam and bombing military targets, I laid out three goals for peace. I thought they were reasonable goals, and they were these: First, there should be a cease-fire, stop the killing. Second, all of America's POW's should be returned and all of our missing in action should be accounted for. And third, the people of South Vietnam, the
17 million people who live in South Vietnam, should have theright to determine their own future without having a Communist government imposed upon them against their will by force. Those were the three goals. 
Now, based on the progress that has been made in the negotiations to date, I can say with confidence tonight that I believe that we can succeed in achieving those goals. I believe that we will succeed in achieving the goal that I have heard from those young people sitting behind us, peace with honor, and not surrender, for America. The day has not yet come. There are still some differences that must be resolved. I believe that they will be resolved



400 - Remarks at Chicago, Illinois.
November 3, 1972

And let us also remember this thing: When we speak of peace, we want it; when we speak of ending a war, we want it; but let us remember we have ended wars before. The important thing is to end a war in a way that will build a lasting peace, and that is why I say, rather than peace with surrender, let's have peace with honor for the United States of America. 
As I reported last night on television, we have made a very significant breakthrough in achieving that goal in our negotiations with the North Vietnamese. We have already reached basic agreement on the three major conditions that I laid down in the speech that I made to the Nation on May 8 when I ordered the bombing and the mining of Haiphong and North Vietnam, and those three agreements that we have already reached basic agreement on are these: 
One, a return of all of our prisoners of war and an accounting for the MIA's; two, a cease-fire throughout not just Vietnam, but throughout all of Indochina, Cambodia, and Laos; and three, theright of the people of South Vietnam to determine their own future without having a Communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will. 
There are some details of the agreement that are still to be negotiated. I am confident they will be negotiated. I am confident that we will make an agreement. Let me address myself, however, to a question that one member of my staff raised this morning, to the effect that, "Why are details important? Why not just make an agreement and sign it, because that would be really great just before the election?" 
Let me tell you something. Rather than having simply an agreement before an election, we want to have a peace for the next generation, and that is what we are working for. I can assure you that as far as an election is concerned, it will not delay an agreement. I can assure you, however, it will not hasten it. The main thing is, we are going to have one, and it is going to be theright kind. I think the American people want theright kind of an agreement--peace with honor and not surrender. That is what we are standing for and that is what we will achieve




402 - Remarks at Tulsa, Oklahoma.
November 3, 1972

I speak also of the progress we have made toward peace in Vietnam. I speak of the fact that we have brought over 500,000 home. I also speak of what you have all read about, of the fact that we have finally made a breakthrough in the negotiations to bring about a peace with honor. We have already agreed on major provisions. Listen to these provisions because they are the ones that I laid down in my speech of May 8 when, as you remember, I ordered the mining of Haiphong and the bombing of North Vietnam: First, we have agreed, have an agreement, that all of our prisoners of war will be returned and all of our missing in action will be accounted for. Second, we have an agreement that we will have a cease-fire throughout Indochina, in Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos. Third, and this is a very important part of what we have agreed to, we have agreed that the 17 million people of South Vietnam shall have theright to choose their own government without having a Communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will. 
We have not yet signed the final agreement and the reason that we have not is that some of the details, some of the issues, are still to be finally worked out. I am confident that they will soon be worked out. Let me tell you what the election has to do with this. As far as the election is concerned, it will not have any effect in hastening us to sign an agreement that would be wrong and it will have no effect in delaying us from signing an agreement that is right. 
Let me tell you, what is far more important than this next election is peace for the next generation, and we are going to have theright kind of an agreement. 
You remember in 1968 when a bombing halt agreement was made just before an election. It was made with the best of intentions, I am sure, by the previous Administration. But because it wasn't nailed down in its details the war went on. 
We are not going to make that mistake. We are nailing down the details. We are getting an agreement which will not simply be an interlude between wars, but which will lay the foundation for peace in the years ahead. I know that peace with honor rather than peace with surrender is what all of the people of this State want



407 - Remarks at Greensboro, North Carolina.
November 4, 1972

As you know, we have made a major breakthrough in the negotiations which can lead to that peace with honor. In making that breakthrough I want to point out that we have reached agreement on the three fundamental principles that I laid down on May 8 when, as you recall, I ordered the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of Haiphong. 
Those three conditions on which we have reached agreement are these: one, all of our prisoners of war and those who are missing in action, all of our prisoners of war will be returned, those missing in action will be accounted for; two, we have reached agreement that there should be a cease-fire, not only in South Vietnam but in Cambodia and Laos, all over Southeast Asia; and third, we have reached agreement on the fundamental point that the people of South Vietnam should have theright to determine their own future without having a Communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will. 
There are some details that are still to be negotiated. We are going to negotiate them. I want to tell you why. Because in reaching an agreement like this we want to be sure that it is not just a case of peace now but peace in the years ahead. We want peace that will last and we want to be sure that as far as the details are concerned, all of the misunderstandings are removed now. 
Let me take you back 4 years. You remember the bombing halt in 1968. You remember it was entered into with the very best of intentions by those who made it. But you remember also that it did not lead to peace; it simply led to a continuation of the war. There was a misunderstanding. What we are doing is insisting on continuing the negotiation on which we have basic agreement on the major principles that I have mentioned, but continue it until the details are worked out. 
We are confident we can achieve that goal, but it will be a goal that we then can be proud to say is peace with honor, not peace with surrender, a peace that will last for the United States and for the world. 
In that connection, the day before yesterday the mayor of Erie, Pennsylvania, a Democrat, came in to see me. He indicated his support of our ticket in his State. His wife was with him. His wife's brother had been killed in Vietnam
4 days after the bombing halt. She showed me his picture, a fine young man, a major in the United States Army. She told me about him. She said that she had received a letter from him just before his death. That letter indicated at that point support for what I was trying to advocate at that time in the campaign. 
Then she said to me, "Mr. President, we all want peace, but above everything else, we want a real peace. We want a peace that will last. We want peace with honor. We want to be sure that he died, and others died, for a cause that will serve this country and serve it well." 
Let me tell you: We are keeping that pledge to those who gave their lives so that America could survive as a country of peace. There is one other thought that occurred to me as she was talking to me. I think of the fact that during this very long and difficult war, a war which began 5 years before I ever came to office, but during the whole course of this long and difficult war, over 2? million young Americans, when they had to make a decision, chose to serve their country in Vietnam, and they deserve our respect and our honor for having made that choice





409 - Remarks at Albuquerque, New Mexico.
November 4, 1972

I begin, of course, with the progress that we have made in bringing to an end the war in Vietnam. It has been very significant. Most important, as you know, we have made a major breakthrough in the negotiations. We have already agreed, in the settlement, to the principles that I laid down in my speech of May 8, which you may recall was made at the time that I ordered the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of Haiphong, at the time that the Communists were invading from the North. I said then that these were the three principles that we would have to have to have a negotiated settlement: First, that there should be a cease-fire. Second, that there should be a return of all of our prisoners of war and accounting for our missing in action. Third, that the people of South Vietnam should determine their own future without having a Communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will. 
Those three principles are agreed upon, and that is a major breakthrough in these negotiations. There are some details, as I pointed out on television 2 nights ago, in terms of the agreement, that are still in the process of negotiation. Those details, in my belief, I am confident will be worked out. We will have a negotiated settlement and a negotiated end to this war. 
But let me tell you why details are important. They are important because what we want is not just peace now. Peace now is important. What we want is peace now and for the generations ahead, and we must have theright kind of peace. You may recall back in 1968 when, with the very best of intentions, the previous Administration entered into a bombing halt of North Vietnam and everybody thought we were going to have peace now. But we didn't have it down. We didn't have it understood. We are not going to make that mistake again. 
We are going to have the kind of agreement which will end this war and build the foundation for a lasting peace that we can enjoy in that part of the world and all over the world. And that kind of peace, my friends--and let us understand what the issue is, and this is the basic difference between the two candidates--I say it shall be peace with honor and not peace with surrender for the United States of America



411 - Remarks at Ontario, California.
November 4, 1972

You know what has happened, the number that we have brought home, the casualties are down. But most important, finally we have had a breakthrough in the negotiations, and I can tell you today that the significant point of that breakthrough is that the three principles that I laid down when, on May 8, I ordered the bombing of North Vietnam and the mining of Haiphong for the purpose of stopping the Communist invasion of the South, those three principles have now been agreed to, and they are these: 
First, all of our POW's will be returned and our missing in action will be accounted for; second, it has been agreed that there will be a cease-fire; and third, it has been agreed that the people of South Vietnam shall determine their own future without having a Communist government or a coalition government imposed upon them against their will. 
Now we have a situation in which, having made this progress, we now must negotiate the final details. Those details must however be completed and be completed in a proper way. I want to tell you why. While the general principles have been agreed upon, we have often found in the history of settlements that unless you nail down the understandings and clear away the ambiguities you may get peace now, but not peace for the years ahead. We want peace that will last, not peace that will be simply for a little while. 
You remember, for example, just before the election in 1968, when, with the very best of intentions, our Government agreed to a bombing halt in North Vietnam and we thought we were going to have peace or negotiations for peace. We thought so, but the understandings were not nailed down and as a result the war continued. 
We are not making that mistake this time. I can simply say this: We have agreement on the general principles and I am confident we will negotiate the settlement which will end the war and bring us what we all want--peace with honor and not peace with surrender for the United States of America



12 - Address to the Nation Announcing Conclusion of an Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam.
January 23, 1973

I have asked for this radio and television time tonight for the purpose of announcing that we today have concluded an agreement to end the war and bring peace with honor in Vietnam and in Southeast Asia. 
The following statement is being issued at this moment in Washington and Hanoi: 
At 12:30 Paris time today, January 23, 1973, the Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam was initialed by Dr. Henry Kissinger on behalf of the United States, and Special Adviser Le Duc Tho on behalf of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. 
The agreement will be formally signed by the parties participating in the Paris Conference on Vietnam on January 27, 1973, at the International Conference Center in Paris. 
The cease-fire will take effect at 2400 Greenwich Mean Time, January 27, 1973. The United States and the Democratic Republic of Vietnam express the hope that this agreement will insure stable peace in Vietnam and contribute to the preservation of lasting peace in Indochina and Southeast Asia. 
That concludes the formal statement. Throughout the years of negotiations, we have insisted on peace with honor. In my addresses to the Nation from this room of January 25 and May 8 [1972], I set forth the goals that we considered essential for peace with honor. 
In the settlement that has now been agreed to, all the conditions that I laid down then have been met: 
A cease-fire, internationally supervised, will begin at 7 p.m., this Saturday, January 27, Washington time. 
Within 60 days from this Saturday, all Americans held prisoners of war throughout Indochina will be released. There will be the fullest possible accounting for all of those who are missing in action. 
During the same 60-day period, all American forces will be withdrawn from South Vietnam. 
The people of South Vietnam have been guaranteed theright to determine their own future, without outside interference. 
By joint agreement, the full text of the agreement and the protocol to carry it out will be issued tomorrow. 
We must recognize that ending the war is only the first step toward building the peace. All parties must now see to it that this is a peace that lasts, and also a peace that heals--and a peace that not only ends the war in Southeast Asia but contributes to the prospects of peace in the whole world. 
This will mean that the terms of the agreement must be scrupulously adhered to. We shall do everything the agreement requires of us, and we shall expect the other parties to do everything it requires of them. We shall also expect other interested nations to help insure that the agreement is carried out and peace is maintained. 
As this long and very difficult war ends, I would like to address a few special words to each of those who have been parties in the conflict. 
To the leaders of North Vietnam: As we have ended the war through negotiations, let us now build a peace of reconciliation. For our part, we are prepared to make a major effort to help achieve that goal. But just as reciprocity was needed to end the war, so too will it be needed to build and strengthen the peace. 
And finally, to all of you who are listening, the American people: Your steadfastness in supporting our insistence on peace with honor has made peace with honor possible. I know that you would not have wanted that peace jeopardized. With our secret negotiations at the sensitive stage they were in during this recent period, for me to have discussed publicly our efforts to secure peace would not only have violated our understanding with North Vietnam, it would have seriously harmed and possibly destroyed the chances for peace. Therefore, I know that you now can understand why, during these past several weeks, I have not made any public statements about those efforts. 
The important thing was not to talk about peace, but to get peace--and to get theright kind of peace. This we have done. 
Now that we have achieved an honorable agreement, let us be proud that America did not settle for a peace that would have betrayed our allies, that would have abandoned our prisoners of war, or that would have ended the war for us but would have continued the war for the 50 million people of Indochina. Let us be proud of the 2 1/2 million young Americans who served in Vietnam, who served with honor and distinction in one of the most selfless enterprises in the history of nations. And let us be proud of those who sacrificed, who gave their lives so that the people of South Vietnam might live in freedom and so that the world might live in peace. 























