MID 362501, US v Iran, 17 sep to 17-Oct-85 to 14-Mar-86




Interview With Pat Robertson of the Christian Broadcasting Network 
September 19, 1985

The President. Well, I can't really talk about what we are doing, because I don't want to do anything that will endanger the prospects of the others being freed. I can only say that we have explored every avenue. We've been working for this for all the time since the first one, Mr. Buckley, was kidnaped. And I know that some of the families have grown impatient, because if they don't see things in the paper, they don't think we're doing anything. But going public and being in the paper is not the way to get a Reverend Weir back or any of the others. 
The President. I have to remain cautiously optimistic. And we are continuing the efforts that—and we've explored and been trying in every avenue that is open to us. But, again, it's something I can't talk about because, as I say, there is a risk in all of this for them


Radio Address to the Nation on Foreign Policy 
September 21, 1985

King Hussein, President Mubarak, and I will also discuss the war between Iran and Iraq. America and other nations have worked for years now to bring this war to an end—so far, to no avail. Yet if we cannot end the fighting, we and close friends like Egypt and Jordan can keep it from spreading. In particular, we're determined to preserve the free shipment of oil through the Persian Gulf


Remarks on Signing the Bill of Rights Day and the Human Rights Day and Week Proclamation 
December 10, 1985

In Afghanistan and Cambodia, for example, alien dictatorships, with the support of foreign occupation troops, subject their peoples to unceasing warfare. Today, 6 years after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, up to 120,000 Soviet troops remain. They have slaughtered innocent women and children. They have employed poison gas. And they have loaded toys with small explosives, an attempt to demoralize the people by crippling Afghan children. Some 3 1/2 million Afghans, fully one-fourth of the prewar population, have been forced to flee to Pakistan and Iran. The Communist rulers of Vietnam have launched vicious attacks upon Cambodian refugees, refugees who were fleeing a Communist regime in Cambodia itself, which led to the deaths of up to one-quarter of the entire Cambodian population

One of the more tragic cases today is that of the Baha'i, whose leaders are with us today. The Government of Iran is engaged in rampart religious persecution, especially against the Baha'is. Since 1979, 198 Baha'is have been put to death, 767 are imprisoned, some 10,000 made homeless, and over 25,000 forced to flee their country. Only the continued world outcry can help bring an end to their suffering. In South Africa the inhuman policy of apartheid continues. The declaration of a state of emergency has given the police in that country essentially unlimited powers to silence critics of the government. Thousands of South African citizens have been detained without cause—or charge, I should say, and denied even elementary judicial protection. I have said that apartheid is abhorrent. Itistime that the Government of South Africa took steps to end it and to reach out for compromise and reconciliation to end the turmoil in that strife-torn land. In Chile and the Philippines, too, we've shown our strong concern when our friends deviate from established democratic traditions


Radio Address to the Nation on Tax Reform and the Situation in Nicaragua 
December 14, 1985
Their denial of rights, their trampling of human dignity, their wrecking of an economy with suffocating socialist controls—all hurt and deeply offend us. But there's a cause for deeper concern: the specter of Nicaragua transformed into an international aggressor nation, a base for subversion and terror. Some 3,000 Cuban military personnel now lead and advise the Nicaraguan forces down to the smallest combat units. The Cubans fly the Soviet assault helicopters that gun down Nicaraguan freedom fighters. Over 7,000 Cubans, Soviets, East Germans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and other bloc and terror groups are turning Managua into a breeding ground for subversion. A delegation of Nicaraguans is now in Iran. Nicaragua's border violations against Honduras and Costa Rica continue. And Nicaragua's connection with the recent terrorist attack against Colombia's Supreme Court is now clear

Address to the Nation on National Security 
February 26, 1986

We need to remember where America was 5 years ago. We need to recall the atmosphere of that time: the anxiety that events were out of control, that the West was in decline, that our enemies were on the march. It was not just the Iranian hostage crisis or the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan but the fear felt by many of our friends that America could not, or would not, keep her commitments. Pakistan, the country most threatened by the Afghan invasion, ridiculed the first offer of American aid as "peanuts." Other nations were saying that it was dangerous—deadly dangerous—to be a friend of the United States


Remarks to Jewish Leaders During a White House Briefing on United States Assistance for the Nicaraguan Democratic Resistance 
March 5, 1986

Or listen to what the Sandinista Communists say about Qadhafi, whom they call "our great friend"—Borge again: "Our friendship with Libya is eternal. Libya is a people which, in accordance with our experience, has developed solidarity without frontiers." Remember that one: "Solidarity without frontiers." Qadhafi, meanwhile, has been openly sending them millions of dollars of arms, because, he says: "The Nicaraguan Communists fight with Libya. They fight America," he put it, "on its own ground." The Sandinistas have also drawn close to the Iranians. Just last year the Iranian Prime Minister [Mir Hosein Musavi-Khamenei], who's thought to control Iran's terrorist apparatus, said to Daniel Ortega—and I quote again: "We consider your revolutionary country as our own home." 
Managua has also rolled out the welcome mat for terrorists from around the world, not just Cubans, Bulgarians, Libyans, PLO, and Iranians, but members of the Baader-Meinhof gang, the Basque ETA [Basque Fatherland and Freedom], and the Italian Red Brigade. These criminals and lunatics now camp out on the doorstep of the United States. Let's not kid ourselves; the Sandinistas are avowed, dedicated Communists. And Communists since the days of Lenin have advocated terrorism as a legitimate means to attain political ends. Incidentally, Mr. Lenin's picture is quite prominent on new issues of postage stamps in Nicaragua. If the Sandinistas are allowed to consolidate their hold on Nicaragua, we'll have a permanent staging ground for terrorism. A home away from home for Qadhafi, Arafat, and the Ayatollah—just 3 hours by air from the U.S. border. The recent terrorist attack in the Palace of Justice in Colombia in which the Sandinista Communists were implicated is just the beginning, the first rumblings of a Communist earthquake that could overrun Latin America



Remarks at an Exhibit of Weapons Captured in Central America 
March 13, 1986

The regime which has built—now, I was going to say 9, but now I've been corrected, it is 10—new prisons in Nicaragua and runs drugs to poison our children is backed by an extraordinary support network of international Communists. One doesn't need to be of a particular party or even privy to secret information to see what's happening in Central America. It's clear: Nicaraguan Communists are using their country as a staging area for aggression against their neighbors, while totally subjugating their own people. Their campaign of internal repression and external aggression is being aided and abetted by the Soviet Union, Cuba, East Germany, Bulgaria, Iran, Vietnam, Libya, and other radical states, movements, and organizations




