MID 34701, US v North Korea, 24 nov to 24-Dec-67 to 22-Dec-68

35 - The President's Address to the Nation: The Situation With North Korea.
January 26, 1968

Over the past 15 months the North Koreans have pursued a stepped-up campaign of violence against South Korean and the American troops in the area of the Demilitarized Zone. 
Armed raider teams in very large numbers have been sent into South Korea to engage in sabotage and assassination. 
On January 19, a 31-man team of North Korean raiders invaded Seoul with the object of murdering the President of the Republic of Korea. 
In many of these aggressive actions, Korean and American soldiers have been killed and wounded. The North Koreans are apparently attempting to intimidate the South Koreans and are trying to interrupt the growing spirit of confidence and progress in the Republic of Korea. 
These attacks may also be an attempt by the Communists to divert South Korean and United States military resources which together are now successfully resisting aggression in Vietnam. 
This week the North Koreans committed yet another wanton and aggressive act by seizing an American ship and its crew in international waters. Clearly, this cannotbeaccepted. 
We are doing two things: First, we are very shortly today taking the question before the Security Council of the United Nations. The best result would be for the whole world community to persuade North Korea to return our ship and our men, and to stop the dangerous course of aggression against South Korea. 
We have been making other diplomatic efforts as well. We shall continue to use every means available to find a prompt and a peaceful solution to the problem. 
Second, we have taken and we are taking certain precautionary measures to make sure that our military forces are prepared for any contingency that might arise in this area. 
These actions do not involve in any way a reduction of our forces in Vietnam. 
I hope that the North Koreans will recognize the gravity of the situation which they have created. I am confident that the American people will exhibit in this crisis, as they have in other crises, the determination and unity which are necessary to see it through. Thank you very much



51 - The President's News Conference
February 2, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We understand from neutral nations and from reports from North Korea that the men are being treated well; that those who have suffered wounds are receiving treatment; that the body of the man who died is being held. We have received those reports and examined them. That is about the extent of the information we have on it. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I am not. I don't want to hold out any hopes on information that I have that is not justified. All I can say is that these things take time. 
The most comparable incident, I am told by the military people, to this one was the RB-47 that went down in 1960 and it took some 7 months of negotiations to get our pilots back.5 
We are exploring every diplomatic means that is available to us. We have our best military men reviewing all that happened and, as I said in my statement to you and to the country some time ago, we are taking such precautionary steps as we may think the military situation justifies
We are in very close touch with the President of that country. I think he understands how we feel. 
I would be less than frank if I didn't tell you I was deeply concerned about 83 Americans, as I am sure the President of Korea is. 
I am also deeply concerned about the situation in South Korea and the obligation we have there. We are going to be equal to that obligation. We are going to be true to ourcommitment. 
We have some 50,000 men there. We are going to see that not only are they adequately informed and supplied, but that all of our plans take into consideration the recommendations of that Government that we have found to be not only a friendly Government but an effective one--and one of our best allies. 
I have great respect for the President of South Korea and his judgments. They are being received, considered, and acted upon every day. 
I see nothing in any of these developments to justify a concern on the part of South Korea or America that there is a strain in our relations. I think that is largely talk and speculation and so-called reports. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, there has been a meeting between representatives of North Korea and the United States. We hope there will be additional meetings. 
These meetings have not produced any satisfactory results as far as the United States is concerned. 
I know of nothing that I should add to that statement. And I don't plan to.




169 - The President's News Conference
March 30, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We are always glad to be able to get the release of our prisoners and to be able to reciprocate the actions they take. 
I don't know just how to describe those releases in your terms. You will have to draw your own conclusions there. We are pleased that those exchanges have worked out to the extent they have. We would like to see more of them


223 - The President's News Conference
May 3, 1968

THE PRESIDENT. We have nothing to report that is new. Secretary Katzenbach,6 the day before yesterday, and Secretary Rusk, yesterday, reported all of the information we have in connection with the Pueblo situation. 
We have made it clear to the North Korean authorities that we think these people should not be held; that they should be released; that we will carefully examine all of the evidence following their release.
If there is any indication that we have acted improperly, or have violated their boundaries, we will take appropriate action. 
That is where the matter stands. We think the next step is up to them. 
We hope that upon careful reflection, they will release the men. Then the United States will fairly and impartially look at all the facts available and take a position in keeping with those facts


