MID 295301, US v Canada, 4 jul to 3-Aug-75 to 2-Sep-75



459 - Address in Helsinki Before the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
August 1, 1975

I am here because the leaders of 34 other governments are here--the states of Europe and of our good neighbor, Canada, with whom we share an open border of 5,526 miles, along which there stands not a single armed soldier and across which our two peoples have moved in friendship and mutual respect for 160 years




492 - Address in Minneapolis Before the Annual Convention of the American Legion.
August 19, 1975

So, I say to you--as I said to Mr. Brezhnev and the leaders of other European nations and Canada in Helsinki--peace is crucial, but freedom must come first


498 - Remarks at Dedication Ceremonies for the Libby Dam, Libby, Montana.
August 24, 1975

Mr. Minister, would you please express to Prime Minister Trudeau my very, very best wishes. One of the fine experiences a person has as President of the United States is to meet heads of governments throughout the world. I can say to those from Canada who are here today that the working relationship between Prime Minister Trudeau and myself has been constructive and will continue to be so as we seek to solve these problems between Canada and the United States. Please give to him my very best wishes. 
Obviously, I am tremendously pleased to be here to participate in the dedication of the Libby Dam, another multipurpose project, one of the superb projects that the Army Corps of Engineers has constructed for the benefit of you in Canada, but for all of us in the United States as well as the benefit of Canada
In my conversations with the Minister before coming here for this occasion, I assured him and I believe he assured me--as he indicated in his speech to you-that the United States and Canada will work together.
We can't solve all the problems, but if we approach the difficulties with an open mind and an understanding of the problems of the other, I am confident that many of the difficulties can be resolved. 
The fact that the United States as well as Canada and 14 other nations are working together as consuming nations in the International Energy Agency is another indication of how not 2, but 16 nations can work together to solve a problem that affects we on the North American Continent and those in Western Europe, our allies in NATO. 
We have resolved in this area, the 16 nations that are part of the organization, to share in research and development to find an answer to the financial problems that have arisen because of the high prices charged by OPEC nations, and to solve the problems and work together in the conservation of energy in the free nations, the industrial nations of the world. And if 16 nations can do it, as we are seeking to do, I am absolutely confident that Canada and the United States can do even better
Before closing, let me say how deeply pleased I am that the harmony this multipurpose project has created between technology and environment is equally reflected in the warm relationship that we in the United States have with our neighbors to the north. Relations between Canada and the United States have long been characterized by friendship and partnership. This dam stands as a powerful reminder of the mutual benefits such close cooperation can accomplish



499 - Remarks in Chicago at a Dinner for Participants in the Annual World Championship of the International Star Class Yacht Racing Association
August 24, 1975

Let me extend very forcefully my best wishes to all of the participants and the officials of the 1975 world's championship of the International Star Class Yacht Racing Association. In particular, I would welcome the skippers and the crews who have come from Switzerland, Sweden, Germany, the Bahamas, Canada, and Brazil that are competing in the races this week





