MID 302001, US v Iran, 5 sep to 5-Oct-79 to 21-Jan-81



Steubenville, Ohio Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
September 12, 1979

There's been some—you may be referring to the sale of a million barrels of home heating oil to Iran. Let me explain that to you. 
Iran had an interruption of the production of their home heating oil because of sabotage or because one of their plants broke down. They asked us to let them have a million barrels, because, as was the case when I was a child growing up on the farm and didn't have electricity, they use kerosene or home heating oil for almost everything, for lamps and for heat, for cooking. So, we let them have a million barrels of home heating oil. They sell to us every day 750,000 barrels of crude oil. And I thought it was a good idea for humanitarian purposes and to make sure we keep that market for us open. 
Last spring, when we had serious shortages of fuel oil, heating oil, gasoline, distillate for trucks, it was because they had a revolution in Iran and that supply was interrupted. Now they produce about 4 million barrels each day. We get about 20 percent of that


New York City, New York Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting With Residents of the Borough of Queens. 
September 25, 1979

The question is whether this is a combat unit—we're convinced it is—and whether that combat status should change. I might point out to you that the United States :has troops in several countries around the world, some of them very close to the borders of the Soviet Union. This is part of a normal interrelationship between major powers, like ours, and the Soviet Union. We have troops in South Korea, we have troops in Japan, we have a few troops in Turkey, we have had some troops in Iran, and so forth. And so, this is not a new thing


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
October 10, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. We lost about 100 million barrels of oil that we would ordinarily have acquired the first few months of this year because of the Iranian revolution and the cessation of Iranian shipments to us. Ordinarily they now produce about 4 million barrels a day, and that production was interrupted completely. Because of that, we had potential shortage of tractor fuel during the planting season, which we weathered successfully. We did have some shortages of gasoline on the highways in some areas of our country, as you well know, and we had the threat of a severe shortage of home heating fuel for the Northeast, the entire northern part of our country, during this fall


San Diego, California Remarks at a Reception Hosted by the San Diego County Board of Supervisors. 
October 11, 1979

You experienced that very slightly earlier this year with gasoline lines and temporary shortages of fuel for your automobiles, and it created semi-panic in some communities. People spent half their time sitting in gasoline lines. Just with a slight interruption, we lost about 100 million barrels of oil because Iran had a revolution. They only produced about 3 million barrels a day out of over a hundred million in all in the world, but that little, slight interruption caused us to have severe problems


Ask the President" Remarks During a Telephone Call-out Program on National Public Radio
October 13, 1979

I think our country is possibly, probably going to rely on nuclear power less in future years than other major nations about which I happen to know. In Japan, in Germany, Great Britain, even oil-producing countries like Iran and Saudi Arabia, they're moving much more rapidly toward nuclear power than are we. We are blessed with a broad diversity of energy sources, not only solar, with the technical ability to use it, but also coal, geothermal supplies, oil, natural gas, shale deposits, and many others, hydroelectric power

So, just as Saudi Arabia or Iran or Nigeria or Venezuela benefit from their sale of oil to other countries, we benefit on a permanent basis, hundreds of years, from the export of food products. And if we should interrupt the sale of those grain products overseas, as was done quite frequently when Secretary Butz was running the Agriculture Department and the Republican administration was in office, we would make our potential buyers of American products very uncertain about our ability to supply them.


Oil Imports From Iran Remarks Announcing Discontinuance of United States Imports. 
November 12, 1979

We continue to face a grave situation in Iran, where our Embassy has been seized and more than 60 American citizens continue to be held as hostages in an attempt to force unacceptable demands on our country. We're using every available channel to protect the safety of the hostages and to secure their release. 
Along with the families of the hostages, I have welcomed and I appreciate the restraint that has been shown by Americans during this crisis. We must continue to exhibit such constraint, despite the intensity of our emotions. The lives of our people in Iran are at stake. 
I must emphasize the gravity of the situation. It's vital to the United States and to every other nation that the lives of diplomatic personnel and other citizens abroad be protected and that we refuse to permit the use of terrorism and the seizure and the holding of hostages to impose political demands. 
No one should underestimate the resolve of the American Government and the American people in this matter. It is necessary to eliminate any suggestion that economic pressures can weaken our stand on basic issues of principle. Our position must be clear. I am ordering that we discontinue purchasing of any oil from Iran for delivery to this country. 

American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations Remarks at the 13th Constitutional Convention. 
November 15, 1979

This is the 12th day that more than a hundred innocent human beings, some 60 of whom are members of the United States diplomatic mission, have been held hostage in our Embassy in Iran. For a rare time in human history, a host government has condoned and even encouraged this kind of illegal action against a sovereign territory and official diplomatic relations of another nation. This is an act of terrorism-totally outside the bounds of international law and diplomatic tradition. 
In this time of trial, our deep concern is for the lives of these brave hostages, our Nation's loyal citizens and faithful representatives. Every American feels anger and outrage at what is happening to them, just as every American feels concern for their safety and pride in their great courage. This crisis calls for firmness, and it calls for restraint. And I'm proud that this situation has brought forth calm leadership by officials and private citizens throughout this country. 
Firmness does require patience, and it requires perseverance. Firmness also means measured action, deliberate actions that clarify the real issues, reduce the likelihood of violence, protect our interests, and ensure justice. 
The United States has done nothing and will do nothing that could be used to justify violent or imprudent action by anyone. While we are pursuing all avenues of diplomatic resolution, we're also acting unilaterally as appropriate—with restraint, yes, but without hesitation. 
First, in order to discourage violence and possible bloodshed here, which when televised and transmitted back to Iran might threaten the safety of the hostages, I've discouraged the issuing of permits for demonstrations on Federal properties here in Washington. Consistent with our laws and pursuant to my own powers and responsibilities, I have also encouraged local and State officials to take similar legal action. 
Second, I've directed our immigration authorities to review the visas of some 50,000 Iranian students, who are guests here in our country. Our Nation is fully committed to the enhancement of human rights, the protection of legal rights, and the enhancement of civil justice. All provisions of the United States Constitution will be honored. All foreign nationals who are here lawfully may continue here with their work or their studies. But those who are here illegally will be processed promptly and lawfully for deportation back to their own country. 
Third, I want to remove any question that our principles might be compromised by our supposed need for Iranian oil. Early this week, therefore, I ordered an immediate halt to any purchases or shipments of Iranian oil to the United States of America. 
I'm determined to make clear that we will neverallow any foreign country to dictate any American policy. 
Fourth, in order to protect our economic interests and to ensure that claims on Iran by the United States or by United States citizens are settled in an orderly manner, we've legally frozen official Iranian property and financial assets. The order does not affect any accounts other than those of the Government of Iran, the Central Bank of Iran, or other government-controlled entities. 
Yesterday I further instructed Secretary of State Vance and Ambassador McHenry to oppose any discussion of Iran's problems in the United Nations Security Council as long as American hostages are being held. Only after the hostages are released will we be willing to address Iran's concerns and, then, under the provisions of international law and under the charter of the United Nations. The members of the United Nations Security Council, I am pleased to announce to you, have agreed unanimously with our own proposal. 
It's important for all of us to remember that we will not compromise our fundamental principles of justice no matter how grave the provocation nor how righteous our indignation. At the same time, we will continue to use our influence around the world to obtain the same kinds of human rights for people everywhere. 
In this instance, we are upholding an important principle on behalf of the entire world community. It's a clear tenet of international law and diplomatic tradition that the host government is fully responsible for the safety and well-being of the property and the legal representatives of another country. Less than a year ago-and this is a fact not generally known or recognized—less than a year ago, 70,000 American citizens were in Iran. As you know, thousands of people were killed during the upheavals there, but almost miraculously and because of the good work of Cyrus Vance and others, our people were brought home safely. I thank God for it. Despite the turmoil, each succeeding Iranian Government—and they were being changed, as you know, quite rapidly—protected the citizens of other countries. 
Foreign visitors are often vulnerable to abuse. An embassy is not a fortress. There are no embassies anywhere in the world that can long withstand the attack of a mob if the mob has the support of the host government itself. We had received repeated assurances of protection from the highest officials in the Iranian Government, even a day or two before the mob was incited to attack and before that protection was withdrawn at the last minute. The principle of inviolability of embassies is understood and accepted by nations everywhere, and it's particularly important to smaller nations which have no recourse to economic or military power. This is why the United Nations Security Council has also unanimously supported our demand for the release of the American hostages. 
In accordance with this principle, as recognized and observed by all civilized countries, the Iranian Government and its leaders are fully responsible for the safety and well-being of our representatives in Iran, in Tehran, and they will be held accountable for that responsibility. It is unthinkable that any responsible government in today's modern world could regard the seizure and the holding of the diplomatic officials of another nation as a realistic means to advance any cause whatsoever. Terrorism is not an acceptable means to resolve disputes between individuals or between nations. 
No act has so galvanized the American public toward unity in the last decade as has the holding of our people as hostages in Tehran. We stand today as one people. We are dedicated to the principles and the honor of our Nation. We've taken no action which would justify concern among the people or among the Government of Iran. We have done nothing for which any American need apologize. The actions of Iranian leaders and the radicals who invaded our Embassy were completely unjustified. They and all others must know that the United States of America will not yield to international terrorism or to blackmail. 
These difficult days have reminded us of basic facts and principles which are fundamental to the existence of us as a people. We will honor all constitutional protections and international law and custom, and we will not let our freedom and our security be jeopardized. 
The developments in Iran have made it starkly clear to all of us that our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a direct, physical threat to our freedom and security as Americans. That's why we must all join together in the battle for an energy-secure America. This struggle demands the deliberate and the conscientious participation of every single citizen. Unfortunately, our dependence on foreign oil has been growing for the last 5 or 6 years, especially, when it should have been diminishing. As a nation we have become dependent on the undependable and addicted to the unaffordable.


Iranian Situation and United States Energy Conservation Remarks at a White House Briefing for State Governors. 
November 16, 1979

This kind of support from you is very important to me. Governor Brown in California and others immediately expressed your approval and your willingness to help in putting into effect the prohibition against the acceptance of Iranian oil to our country, and the overwhelming sense that I have is that we have a nation which is united, eager to do the best we can under difficult circumstances, and highly supportive of what we are attempting to accomplish in Iran. 
I've just gotten a report that there are maybe 80,000 Iranians demonstrating outside our Embassy in a highly emotional state, and we are trying as best we can to protect the honor of our country and to protect the lives of the hostages, who are courageous, dedicated, and who deserve every protection that we can give them. 
I would like to add one word of caution, if you don't mind, and I hope that you'll relay it to the people back home who listen to your voice. I've had a large number of expressions of support for us, sympathy for our hostages, and the expression of strong condemnation for what is going on in Iran by Iranians, particularly those who live in our country, who have lived here for years as responsible citizens. And it would be a serious mistake for us to deprive them of their rights or deprive them of their citizenship or deprive them of our friendship. 
There is an inclination in a time of crisis to condemn every person who has connections with Iran, but I hope that you will caution all Americans, as I'm trying to do now, not to abuse the fine tens of thousands of Iranians who live in our country and who have a voice to speak out, as they have to me directly; and also to recognize that in Iran it's the radicals and the militants and the irresponsible elements there who are responsible for the tragedy which we are trying to prevent. 
We are trying to act with circumspection, but also with firmness. Ours is not a country that responds or ever will respond to intimidation or blackmail; we will not honor in any possible way the threats or actions of terrorists. I've tried to act moderately, but without deviation from the principles on which our Nation was founded, and which make us justifiably proud. A few of the things that we have done I'm sure you understand, and on some you've had to join in with me. 
In addition, as you know, I have issued instructions that we will notaccept the shipment of any Iranian oil to our country. I did that to make it vividly clear that our country is not subject to the threat of an embargo or a threat of any other kind. 
I've asked the Immigration and Naturalization Service to examine the visas of Iranian students and others who are here. If they are here legally, they'll be encouraged to stay, or permitted to stay if they choose to pursue their studies or to pursue their work. If they are here illegally, their papers will be processed completely in accordance with our Constitution and laws and the proprieties that we must observe, and they will be deported if they aren't complying with those laws or constitutional provisions. 
In order to protect our own economy and therights and privileges of American business leaders and others, our banks, American citizens, I have frozen the assets of Iran which are directly or indirectly related to the government ownership or control. This is so that debts owed by Iran to us will be paid, and so that we will not have an adverse effect on our economy because of the forfeiture of those debts, because of impoundment in Iran of our assets or properties. 
And the last action that I've taken that I'll mention, in order to save time, is that I have discouraged any meeting of or debate in the United Nations Security Council of the Iranian problem. This was requested by Iran, but my own decision has been that this would not be appropriate as long as they are holding hostages in our Embassy there. And I'm proud to say that the United Nations Security Council unanimously has condemned the Iranian Government for what it has condoned or permitted. And they have also unanimously rejected any proposal by Iran for debate or discussion of this issue while the hostages are being held. 
This is a serious matter, as you know. It's not a reason for panic. It's not reason to abandon the principles or laws or proprieties in our own country. We do not want to be guilty of the same sort of improper action which we are condemning in Iron. And it's, to repeat myself, not a cause for us to abuse any Iranian citizen who's in our country. If there are those here who act improperly, the laws are adequate to care for them. If they are here illegally, our deportation processes will be carried out in a completely proper and predictable way

Diplomatic Relations Remarks on Receiving Diplomatic Credentials From Foreign Ambassadors. 
November 28, 1979

It's extremely important that mob violence be controlled and that international terrorism notbepermitted to reign. All countries are afflicted at times with mob violence and terrorism. The tragedy of the occurrences in Iran is that in a departure from accepted custom and tradition down through the centuries, in this instance the Government itself has both condoned and encouraged the seizure of an American Embassy and our personnel through mob violence and through terrorism. 
The inviolability of embassies is absolutely indispensable in easing tensions and resolving problems that exist among nations and in searching for a common ground of peace and communication among people. This is vital to every country. It's particularly vital to those countries who are small and who are weak and who do not have military power or economic power to exert in defending one's own institutions and one's own fights. 
In this principle, the attitude of our own country, our efforts to have our hostages released and to restore the integrity of our diplomatic institutions, is an effort not only for therights and benefits of the United States but for therights and benefits of all nations. 
Some of the countries represented here, almost all of them, have strongly supported the condemnation of the Iranian Government's actions in seizing our Embassy and holding our hostages captive. We need the help of all countries. The rule of law is only as strong as the efforts of those who arecommitted to defend it. We are very grateful for the help of those nations who have joined us in this effort. 
The harming of innocent people is condemned by every law of mankind and by every law of God, no matter what religious principles or economic or political principles prevail in a country. We are determined to work as peacefully as possible to achieve the release of our hostages as early as we possibly can and, of course, commensurate with that, to defend and to protect the unchanging principles on which our Nation and other nations are founded


The President's News Conference
November 28, 1979
THE PRESIDENT. For the last 24 days our Nation's concern has been focused on our fellow Americans being held hostage in Iran. We have welcomed some of them home to their families and their friends. But we will not rest nor deviate from our efforts until all have been freed from their imprisonment and their abuse. We hold the Government of Iran fully responsible for the well-being and the safe return of every single person. 
In the days to come, our determination may be even more sorely tried, but we will continue to defend the security, the honor, and the freedom of Americans everywhere. This Nation will never yield to blackmail. For all Americans, our constant concern is the well-being and the safety of our fellow citizens who are being held illegally and irresponsibly hostage in Iran. 
The actions of Iran have shocked the civilized world. For a government to applaud mob violence and terrorism, for a government actually to support and, in effect, participate in the taking and the holding of hostages is unprecedented in human history. This violates not only the most fundamental precepts of international law but the common ethical and religious heritage of humanity. There is no recognized religious faith on Earth which condones kidnaping. There is no recognized religious faith on Earth which condones blackmail. There is certainly no religious faith on Earth which condones the sustained abuse of innocent people. 
We are deeply concerned about the inhuman and degrading conditions imposed on the hostages. From every corner of the world, nations and people have voiced their strong revulsion and condemnation of Iran and have joined us in calling for the release of the hostages. 
Last night, a statement of support was released and was issued by the President of the United Nations General Assembly, the Security Council, on behalf of all of its members. We expect a further Security Council meeting on Saturday night, at which more firm and official action may be taken to help in obtaining the release of the American hostages. Any claims raised by government officials of Iran will ring hollow while they keep innocent people bound and abused and threatened. 
We hope that this exercise of diplomacy and international law will bring a peaceful solution, because a peaceful solution is preferable to the other remedies available to the United States. At the same time, we pursue such a solution with grim determination. The Government of Iran must recognize the gravity of the situation, which it has itself created, and the grave consequences which will result if harm comes to any of the hostages. 
I want the American people to know and I want the world to know that we will persist in our efforts, through every means available, until every single American has been freed. We must also recognize now, as we never have before, that it is our entire Nation which is vulnerable, because of our overwhelming and excessive dependence on oil from foreign countries. We have got to accept the fact that this dependence is a direct physical threat to our national security, and we must join together to fight for our Nation's energy freedom. 
However hard it might be to see into the future, one thing tonight is clear: We stand together. We stand as a nation unified, a people determined to protect the life and the honor of every American. And we are determined to make America an energy-secure nation once again. It is unthinkable that we will allow ourselves to be dominated by any form of overdependence at home or any brand of terrorism abroad. We are determined that the freest nation on Earth shall protect and enhance its freedom.

THE PRESIDENT. We have the full support of our allies, and in this particular instance, we have no adversaries overseas. There is no civilized country on Earth which has not condemned the seizure and the holding of the hostages by Iran. 
It would not be advisable for me to explore publicly all of the options open to our country. As I said earlier, I'm determined to do the best I can through diplomatic means and through peaceful means to ensure the safety of our hostages and their release. Other actions which I might decide to take would come in the future, after those peaceful means have been exhausted. 
But I believe that the growing condemnation of the world community on Iran will have a beneficial effect. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. The decision that I made, personally and without pressure from anyone, to carry out the principles of our country, to provide for the means of giving the Shah necessary medical assistance to save his life, was proper. At the same time, we notified the Government of Iran. We were assured by the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister that our Embassy would be protected, and it was protected for several days, in spite of threats from outside. 
Then peremptorily, after Khomeini made an aggravating speech to the crowds in the street and withdrew protection from the Embassy, it was attacked successfully. The Embassy was protected by our people for the length of time possible without help from the host government. No embassy on Earth is a fortress that can withstand constant attacks by a mob, unless a host government comes to the rescue of the people within the embassy. 
I don't think the identity of the Islamic world is a factor. We have the deepest respect and reverence for Islam and for all those who share the Moslem faith. I might say that, so far as I know, all the Islamic nations have joined us in condemning the activities and the actions of the Government of Iran. So, I don't think religious divisions are a factor here at all. 
Many other nations have reduced severely the number of persons overseas. I think one of the points that should be made is that a year ago, we had 70,000 Americans in Iran—70,000. There were literally thousands of people who were killed in the Iranian revolution, from all nations. We were able to extract Americans from Iran safely. It was a superb demonstration of cooperation and good conduct on the part of the State Department and other American officials. 
My own experience, so far, has been that the leaders of nations have recommitted themselves to provide security for embassies of all countries. I think we've learned a lesson from this instance. But, because it is so unique, in the high degree of irresponsibility of the Iranian Government leaders, I don't believe that we'll see another reoccurrence of it any time soon. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not respond. There's no reason for me to get into a public debate at this time with former Secretary Kissinger about who is or who is not responsible for the events that took place in Iran. 
THE PRESIDENT. That's a decision to be made by the Shah and by his medical advisers. When he decided to come to our country, with my permission, I was informed then, and I have been informed since, that as soon as his medical treatment was successfully completed, that his intention was to leave. And I have not encouraged him to leave. He was free to come here for medical treatment, and he will leave on his own volition. 
So, I think that we have a very good relationship with the people and the governments of the Islamic world, and I don't think it's deteriorated in this instance. In some ways, we've been drawn closer to these people, because they see what has occurred in Iran as something of a disgrace for their own religious faith, and they don't see this as typical of what Moslems believe. 
I might add, also, that this is not typical of the Shiite faith, either. It's the misguided actions of a few people in Iran who are burning with hatred and a desire for revenge, completely contrary to the teachings of the Moslem faith. 
THE PRESIDENT. It would be a mistake for the people of our country to have aroused within them hatred toward anyone; not against the people of Iran, and certainly not against Iranians who may be in our country as our guests. We certainly do not want to be guilty of the same violation of human decency and basic human principles that have proven so embarrassing to many of the Iranian citizens themselves. 
We obviously prefer to see our hostages protected and released completely through peaceful means. And that's my deepest commitment, and that will be my goal. The United States has other options available to it, which will be considered, depending upon the circumstances. But I think it would not be well-advised for me to speak of those specifically tonight. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, it's very difficult for an Iranian citizen or a student to get a visa at the American Embassy in Iran at this time [Laughter] And I think the influx of Iranians to our country now would be minimal. 
I'm determined to enforce the law about Iranian students. Some of them have violated the law. They are now being screened; they are being assessed in their commitment and the legality of their presence here. We have already finished this procedure with more than 22,000. About 17,000 have proven to be here completely legally and are indeed fulltime students. Among the other 5,000, about several hundred have already departed; others are now having to prove that, contrary to the earliest evidence, they do indeed have a right to be in our country. If they are here illegally, they will be expelled. 
There is one exception to that rule: If a citizen of Iran can prove that if he or she returned to Iran that they would be executed or abused because of their political beliefs, they can seek asylum here. And if that asylum, in our judgment, is justified, we will provide it for them. 
THE PRESIDENT. It would not be possible or even advisable for me to set a deadline about when or if I would take certain action in the future. This is an ever-present consideration on my mind. I'm carrying out all of the duties that normally fall on a President's shoulder, which are adequate, but I never forget one moment that I'm awake about the hostages whose lives and whose safety depend on me. And I am pursuing every possible avenue to have the hostages released. 
Any excessive threats or any excessive belief among the Iranians that they will be severely damaged by military action, as long as these negotiations are proceeding and as long as legalities can be followed, might cause the death of the hostages, which we arecommitted to avoid. So, that's one of the questions that I cannot answer: to set down a certain deadline beyond which we would take extra action, that might result in the harm or the death of the hostages. 
We are proceeding, I guarantee you, in every possible way, every possible moment, to get the hostages freed and, at the same time, protect the honor and the integrity and the basic principles of our country. That's all I can do, but I am doing it to the best of my ability, and I believe we will be successful. 
But as I said earlier, I don't think there's any forum that will listen to the Iranians make any sort of claim, justified or not, as long as they hold against their will and abuse the hostages, in complete contravention to every international law and every precept or every commitment or principle of humankind.


1980 Democratic Presidential Nomination Remarks Concerning Candidacy and Campaign Plans. 
December 2, 1979

My campaign travels must be, for a time, postponed. I must remain here, near the White House, because of the situation in Iran. While the crisis continues, I must be present to define and to lead our response to an ever-changing situation of the greatest sensitivity and importance. 
I am proud—but not surprised—at the quiet unity of the American people over the past 4 weeks as we have faced this outrageous situation together. Not since Pearl Harbor, some 40 years ago, have we felt such a nationwide surge of determination and mutual purpose. But I must warn you that this crisis may not be resolved easily or quickly. It is possible that in the days ahead, our patience and sense of unity may waver as frustration builds up among us. I am determined to do everything I can to have the hostages released as soon as possible. 
At the height of the Civil War, President Abraham Lincoln said, "I have but one task, and that is to save the Union."
Now I must devote my concerted efforts to resolving the Iranian crisis. The overriding fact is that 50 of our fellow Americans have been unjustifiably thrust into agony and danger, and I have a personal responsibility to get them out of that danger as fast as possible


1980 Democratic Presidential Nomination Remarks Announcing Candidacy. 
December 4, 1979

I speak to you this afternoon at a somber time. Fifty Americans continue to be held captive in Iran, hostages of a mob and a government that have become one and the same. This crisis, precipitated by this unlawful and unprecedented act, has demanded my closest attention since the first moment that it began


President's Commission on the Accident at Three Mile Island Remarks Announcing Actions in Response to the Commission's Report. 
December 7, 1979

The recent events in Iran have shown us the clear, stark dangers that excessive dependence on imported oil holds for our Nation. We must make every effort to lead this country to energy security. Every domestic energy source, including nuclear power, is critical if we are to be free as a country from our present overdependence on unstable and uncertain sources of high-priced foreign oil


American Hostages in Iran Remarks to State Department Employees. 
December 7, 1979

The most important single message that I can give to you is this: As far as I am concerned, as far as the State Department is concerned, as far as our Nation is concerned, there is one issue, and that is the early and the safe release of the American hostages from their captors in Tehran. And it's important for us to realize that from the very first hour of the captivity of our hostages by a mob, who is indistinguishable from the Government itself, that has been our purpose. And we have tried to restrain every other' nation and the United Nations and the people in our own country from confusing the issues. 
At this time, I am not interested in trying to resolve whether or not the Shah was a good or bad leader or the history of Iran. I'm not trying to interfere in the Government of Iran or the inclination of the people there, and we do not want to confuse the issue by injecting these extraneous questions or debates into the present situation. When that does happen, in my opinion, it delays the day when we will see the American hostages come home. 
I am not going to take any military action that would cause bloodshed or arouse the unstable captors of our hostages to attack them or to punish them. I'm going to be very moderate, very cautious, guided and supported and advised by Secretary Vance. Our purpose is to get the hostages home and get them safe. That's my total commitment, and I know you join with me as full partners in this effort


Dinner Honoring Thomas P. O'Neill, Jr. Remarks at the Fundraising Dinner for the O'Neill Chair at Boston College
December 9, 1979

Many people have asked why I'm here tonight in the midst of some very important business in Iran. When I was presented with my schedule for this month, my immediate and firm Presidential response was, "I am not going to any fundraising events for the time being." And Frank Moore, my congressional liaison chief, said, "Mr. President, the Speaker thinks you ought to be there." [Laughter] So, it is a real pleasure for me to be- [laughter] —it's a real pleasure for me to be here with a thousand other close friends— [laughter] —of Tip O'Neill's to honor Boston College and its most distinguished graduate

The events in Iran remind us that our basic values mean as much today as at any time in our Nation's history. Now those qualities are being severely tested, not just by a mob in Iran, who hold hostage innocent Americans, but by the changing nature of the entire world. I have no doubt that we in America will prevail, because we are right, because we are strong, because we are united. 
Our form of government has endured every test. Americans have never found a question that we could not answer if we were united. Americans have never found an obstacle that we could not overcome if we were united. Americans have never found a challenge we could not meet if we were united. Our form of government has endured, and it has grown. It has improved itself in quality for two centuries. And long after the mobs have gone home in Iran, long after there have been many changes of government and constitutions and ideologies elsewhere in the world, American democracy and the ideal of America will stand as they do today-the brightest and the best hope of mankind, a clear, undimmed beacon of fundamental human rights and human values.


United States Defense Policy Remarks to Members of the Business Council. 
December 12, 1979

It's indeed a pleasure for me to be with you again. This afternoon I would like to make a very important statement to you, following which the chairman and I will walk down the hall, and I'd like to greet each one of you individually, as has been my custom in the past when we've been together. And then we'll have a chance for a few questions that you might want to put to me concerning energy or inflation or legislation before the Congress or Iran or other matters of interest to you

Recent events in Iran have been a vivid reminder of the need for a strong and united America, a nation which is supported by its allies and which need not bluff or posture in the quiet exercise of our strength and in our continued commitment to international law and the preservation of peace. Today, regardless of other disagreements among ourselves, we are united in the belief that we must have a strong defense and that military weakness would inevitably make war more likely


Gannett Newspaper and Broadcast Executives Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a White House Briefing. 
December 13, 1979

Our Nation is now embroiled in a circumstance in Iran that's not only difficult but also extremely sensitive and may have historic connotations for the future. I think it's demonstrated that Americans can be remarkably united, that Americans can be remarkably resolved, and that, contrary to our basic nature, Americans can also be very patient, when patience is the better part of valor. 
I don't know what the future will bring in the Iran situation. It's so far been handled with, I think, dispatch and also with wisdom. I've got good advisers, and we're very cautious about how we have approached this difficult circumstance. 
We have emphasized over and over, not adequately yet, that there is no confrontation or schism between the world of Islam, the Moslem countries and our own country. This is not the point at all. And as far as the hostages are concerned, they are the only issue for us. It's not a proper time for us to discuss the wisdom or the role that the Shah played as a good or bad leader. It's not a proper time for us to get involved in a debate about whether he is or has been sick, or how sick, or where he goes, or to discuss the history of Iran. 
It's important, and we have recognized the importance of maintaining one issue foremost in our mind and in our national consciousness in our dealing with other countries, in our dealing with Iran, in our dealing with the United Nations, and that is the early and the safe release of the American hostages. I'm very proud of the way our Nation has performed. 
We do have adequate military presence in the Arabian Sea at the mouth of the Persian Gulf. We've not made idle threats; we've not had to. We've made a clear statement of our purpose and ourresolve, which will be exercised if necessary. What we want is peace, and what we want is a good relationship, now and in the future, with the people of Iran. We're not trying to decide what form of government they should have. We're not trying to interfere in their own internal affairs. We think they've violated every international law imaginable—the Geneva agreements, the premises on which the United Nations Charter is based.
But I would guess, to be serious about it, that a lot of the poll response has been because of the Iranian question, a natural desire on the part of Americans to support their President in a time of crisis or challenge. That's part of it. The other part, to be equally frank, is that I believe that the expectations that were felt among many Democrats concerning Senator Kennedy's ability has been attenuated since he became an active candidate. That was almost inevitable, and I don't say that in derogation of him. But those two factors are obviously at play

THE PRESIDENT. I'm determined that that will not happen, Don 
We had, as you know, one of our Ambassadors who was captured in Manchuria-maybe the incident to which you refer, maybe a different one—and he stayed imprisoned for more than a year. It was during President Truman's administration. He was finally released, I think, in the fall or winter of 1949. I'm not sure about the exact date. 
There, President Truman—I've re-read the history on it and even the private memoranda that were exchanged within the White House—and President Truman did ask the Joint Chiefs of Staff and others to analyze how he might, through physical action if necessary, cause the release of our Ambassador and his staff. It was not done, and eventually the Ambassador was released. 
I'm determined that in this particular incident we will not forget those hostages one day and that we will continue to keep the issue of their illegal incarceration in the forefront of the consciousness not only of America but of the entire world. There are a series of steps that we can take. There are also steps that the Iranians are taking, not for the same purpose, to keep this a vivid issue in the minds of the people throughout the world. 
We will not let it become a dormant issue, or we will not let the status quo become acceptable. In my judgment there has been some change, substantial change, in the attitude even among the Iranians. And if you go back and look at the early comments or statements that were made and compare them to the more recent ones, you see that there has been some evolutionary change, not always in theright direction, but, I think, in general it has. 
The promise that our hostages would be tried individually as war criminals and perhaps even executed was the earliest threats made. That has, to some degree, been changed. Their early expectation that the Shah would be returned to them through blackmail—I think those expectations have now been lowered, if not eliminated altogether, and so I think that, in itself, is good. 
But I will notpermit this incident to become acceptable and to be dragged out. I'll do my utmost to prevent that. I don't want that to be interpreted as threatening military action. I'll do everything I can to avoid any bloodshed, provided our hostages are not physically harmed


Christmas Pageant of Peace Remarks on Lighting the National Community Christmas Tree. 
December 13, 1979

We've seen divisions among people because of religious beliefs. The recent events in Iran are an unfortunate example of that misguided application of belief in God. But I know that all Americans feel very deeply that the relationships between ourselves and the Moslem believers in the world of Islam is one of respect and care and brotherhood and good will and love



Visit of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony. 
December 17, 1979

I want the American people to get to know you, Madame Prime Minister, as I have come to know you and admire you. And I particularly want to emphasize that our people in Great Britain, the United Kingdom, and the United States have always 'seen our finest achievements in times of crisis and in times of challenge. I particularly want to thank you personally, on behalf of all Americans, and remind all the citizens of this country that from the very first moment when American hostages were captured and held illegally in Iran, your government has been in the forefront of those who have helped us in every way; both privately and through diplomatic means, and through public means, you've been staunch allies, staunch friends, staunch supporters of ours. And I deeply appreciate it


Visit of Prime Minister Thatcher of the United Kingdom Remarks Following a Meeting. 
December 17, 1979

We have had long discussions about Iran. I've expressed again my thanks to the Prime Minister about the strong and unequivocal support on that issue. We've expressed our admiration and appreciation for the progress that has been made by her and by Lord Carrington in negotiating for a peaceful and democratic settlement in Rhodesia and again pledged our full support in their efforts in that difficult issue


International Economic Sanctions Against Iran Remarks Announcing Intention To Seek United Nations Action. 
December 21, 1979

THE PRESIDENT. From the first day the American Embassy was invaded and our diplomatic staff was seized as hostages by Iran, we have pursued every. legal channel available to us to secure their safe and prompt release. On at least four separate occasions the world community, through the United Nations Security Council and through the International Court of Justice, has expressed itself clearly and firmly in calling upon the Iranian Government to release the American hostages. 
Yet Iran today still stands in arrogant defiance of the world community. It has shown contempt not only for international law but for the entire international structure for securing the peaceful resolution of differences among nations. 
In an irresponsible attempt at blackmail, to which the United States will never yield, kidnappers and terrorists, supported by Iranian officials, continue to hold our people under inhumane conditions. With each day that passes, our concern grows for the health and for the well-being of the hostages. We have made clear from the very beginning that the United States prefers a peaceful solution, in preference to the other remedies which are available to us under international law. For a peaceful resolution to be achieved, it is now clear that concrete action must be taken by the international community. 
Accordingly, I have decided to ask for an early meeting of the United Nations Security Council to impose international economic sanctions upon Iran, under title VII of the United Nations Charter. The Government of Iran must realize that it cannot flaunt with impunity the expressed will and law of the world community. The Security Council mustact to enforce its demand that Iran release the hostages. The world community must support the legal machinery it has established, so that the United Nations and the International Court of Justice will continue to be relevant in settling serious disputes which threaten peace among nations. 
I can think of no more clear and compelling challenge to the international community than the one we face today. The lives of over '50 innocent people are at stake; the foundation of civilized diplomacy is at stake; the integrity of international law is at stake; the credibility of the United Nations is at stake. And at stake, ultimately, is the maintenance of peace in the region. As we callon the Security Council to act, on behalf of international law and on behalf of peace, we again callon the Government of Iran to end this crisis by releasing the hostages without delay. 
And now, because our holy days approach—a time to think of peace—I would like to add a few special words for the American people, indeed the people of good will in all countries, including Iran, who share concern for 50 innocent human beings who hope, themselves, for peace and for the salvation of their lives. 
THE PRESIDENT. We don't know what the answer to that question is. We always hope, but we don't expect it to happen. 


American Hostages in Iran and Soviet Intervention in Afghanistan Remarks to Reporters
December 28, 1979

Secretary of State Vance will proceed to the United Nations tomorrow to press the world's case against Iran in order to obtain the speediest possible release of American hostages, in accordance with the demands which have already been made earlier by the United Nations Security Council and the International Court of Justice. 
The United States reserves theright to protect our citizens and our vitalinterests in whatever way we consider appropriate in keeping with principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. But our clear preference is now, and has been from the beginning of this crisis, for a quick and a peaceful solution of this problem through concerted international action. 
We must never lose sight of our basic goals in this crisis—the safety of our fellow citizens and the protection of the long-term interests of the United States. A thoughtful and determined policy, which makes clear that Iran will continue to pay an increasingly higher price for the illegal detention of our people, is the best policy to achieve those goals, and it is the policy that I will continue to pursue. 
This is the third occasion since World War II that the Soviet Union has moved militarily to assert control over one of its neighbors, and this is the first such venture into a Muslim country by the Soviet Union since the Soviet occupation of Iranian Azerbaijan in the 1940's




Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan Address to the Nation. 
January 4, 1980

I continue to share with all of you the sense of outrage and impatience because of the kidnaping of innocent American hostages and the holding of them by militant terrorists with the support and the approval of Iranian officials. Our purposes continue to be the protection of the longrange interests of our Nation and the safety of the American hostages. 
We are attempting to secure the release of the Americans through the International Court of Justice, through the United Nations, and through public and private diplomatic efforts. We are determined to achieve this goal. We hope to do so without bloodshed and without any further danger to the lives of our 50 fellow Americans. In these efforts, we continue to have the strong support of the world community. The unity and the common sense of the American people under such trying circumstances are essential to the success of our efforts
We must recognize the strategic importance of Afghanistan to stability and peace. A Soviet-occupied Afghanistan threatens both Iran and Pakistan and is a steppingstone to possible control over much of the world's oil supplies



Interview With the President Excerpts From a Question-and-Answer Session With John Chancellor of NBC News. 
January 7, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. We've always had a few basic principles to guide me since I've been involved in meeting this absolutely illegal and abhorrent act. One is to protect the long-range interests of our country; secondly, to protect the lives and the well-being of the hostages; third, to seek their release; fourth, to avoid bloodshed if possible, but still to protect our interests if necessary; and lastly, to make sure that a strong majority of the nations of the world understand that Iran is a criminal actor in this process and that we are the aggrieved party, and to keep world support for our position. 
And I think that Iran must realize-there are some responsible people in Iran—and the world must realize that Iran is at this moment involved in a criminal act, a terrorist act. And it's not a matter of negotiating on a diplomatic basis between two nations. This is a matter of condemning Iran for international terrorism and for kidnaping. And I think those purposes that I've described are and will be our basic principles until those hostages are home safe. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would rather not give specifics, but we are prepared to takeaction that would be quite serious in its consequences for Iran. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't think it would be good to go into details.


Situation in Iran and Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan Remarks at a White House Briefing for Members of Congress. 
January 8, 1980

We've now had four votes in the Security Council, as you know. We've not yet experienced a negative vote. On the last vote to set a deadline for the imposition of sanctions and to callfor the Secretary-General's trip to Iran, there were four abstentions—the Soviet Union and their puppet, Czechoslovakia, and two small Moslem nations, Bangladesh and Kuwait. The other 11 nations voted to send the Secretary-General to Iran for a last effort to negotiate the release of the hostages, at the end of which time the Security Council would come back and takeaction on possible economic sanctions. 
So far then, we have accomplished all the goals that we set for ourselves except the release of the hostages, and we are still exploring every possible avenue for that release. 
The most difficult part of the Iranian question is that there's no government entity with whom we can communicate or negotiate or register a complaint or a request. When the Secretary-General went over to Iran, he came back and reported the same thing that we had already known, and that is that the most powerful single political entity in Iran consists of the international terrorists or 'the kidnapers who are holding our hostages. Whenever there has been a showdown concerning the hostages between Khomeini or the .Revolutionary Council versus the terrorists, the terrorists have always prevailed. 
We don't know what will happen in the future, but I think you possibly recognize that this small group of people—who may originally have comprised some students, but who are not students and should not be referred to as students—have achieved, with the holding of American hostages, a great and significant political influence in Iran. They don't necessarily have as one of their prime interests the integrity of Iran as a nation or the well-being of the Iranian people or even the security of the country within which they live. And so there is no legitimate political bargaining leverage that can be exerted on them, and there is no entity there with whom one can negotiate. 
They know that the consequences to Iran will be quite severe if our hostages are injured or killed, and I think only the presence of a very strong military force in the Arabian Sea has deterred them so far from taking action that would have been even more abhorrent to the rest of the world. That problem persists. It's an everpresent consideration of mine and yours. And I'm determined that this country will not forget for a moment those hostages. And the last hostage there is just as important to me as the first one. 
Our country is remarkably unified. I've had strong support, which I deeply appreciate, and the American people have been surprisingly patient, which, as you know, is not a characteristic of Americans. But I think most people who've studied the situation, who've looked at the map, who've seen where the Embassy is located within Tehran, can see that a strike force or a military action that might be oriented toward the release of the hostages would almost certainly end in failure and almost certainly end in the death of the hostages. 
They are being held in small groups, two or perhaps three in a group, with heavily armed militants constantly guarding them and the hostages constantly being tied, with their hands bound at all times. 
We'll continue to persist. Our next step will be in the United Nations to have sanctions imposed against Iran. I cannot predict to you that the imposition of those sanctions, if we get the nine requisite votes, will cause an early release of the hostages. We pray that something will happen and that eventually Iran will recognize that the threat to them is not from the United States, but even more vividly from the Soviet Union, who have, on Christmas Eve, invaded Afghanistan
Because of the Iranian. question, we have greatly built up our naval forces in the northern China Sea or in the Arabian Sea. Those will be maintained at a higher level than they have been in the past. And as you know, there has been a marshaling of worldwide public opinion, not only in the condemnation of the Iranian terrorists who hold our hostages but also against the Soviet Union for their unprecedented invasion of Afghanistan in this recent few weeks



Youth Employment and Training Programs Remarks Announcing a New Initiative. 
January 10, 1980

We are outraged when we see our own citizens kidnaped and abused in Iran, and we are also outraged when we see in Afghanistan the independence of that nation and the freedom of their people destroyed by the invading force of a superpower. I'm convinced that our Nation and those who stand with us will prevail in. this time of testing, because we, collectively, are strong and because we, collectively, are right


White House Conference on Small Business Remarks at the Opening Session of the Conference
January 13, 1980

As citizens of a free society, as supporters of human freedom and human dignity, we have been justifiably outraged about recent international events. We are outraged that, half a world away, the Iranian Government holds 50 innocent Americans hostage in violation of international law and in violation of human decency. And we are also outraged that in that same troubled spot of the world, armed forces of the Soviet Union, a superpower, have launched a massive invasion of the small, nonaligned country of Afghanistan. 
Yet for all our anger, the United States has responded with a combination of restraint and firmness. For all the world to see, we have reasserted ourcommitment to the rule of law in international conduct, and we have worked carefully with our own allies and within the United Nations. We will continue to protect American interests and, if possible, preserve the peace. But we will protect the interests of the United States, using whateveraction is required. 
This has not been an easy 2 months for any of us. But I think we've shown the world that America will not give in to terrorism or to international intimidation, whatever its forms might be or wherever it might occur. 
As President, I have been very proud of the American people. We've risen to this occasion as a united nation. We've spoken loud and clear with one voice, and the world has listened with respect. In an almost unprecedented way, the United States has been joined and supported by nations of all kinds—deeply religious and atheistic, large and small, east and west, north and south, they have joined with us to condemn what has occurred in Iran and Afghanistan
The events in Iran and Afghanistan have helped to underscore hard work ahead for America in the 1980's. They've dramatized the need for greater cooperation and for greater unity in facing our common problems. Clearly we have our work cut out for us, and this conference is an important part of that work



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors
January 15, 1980

This is only one of the two major questions that our Nation must resolve—the other, of course, being the illegal kidnaping of the innocent American hostages, and their being held with the support of the Iranian officials themselves. Again, we are taking action in accordance with our own Nation's best interests. We're being consistent, and I hope effective. We're protecting not only the lives of the hostages, but also maintaining a strong, supportive role among a majority of the nations of the world

Another thing is that our Nation has faced in recent months, the last 2 months, a little more, a threat to world peace. And I think at a time like this the President's voice is heard very clearly. I've had a chance to speak and let the American people understand the considerations that I've had to face, and understand the decisions that I've made. I think basically we've taken theright steps to meet the threat to our hostages in Iran, more recently the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

THE PRESIDENT. The consultations in Europe are more broad-ranging than just Afghanistan. They involve Iran, and they involve other things as well. It's hard to single out any particular item, but this is not a late-developing commitment of our country. Let me just very quickly go down a list of things, without going into detail on any

And it has much greater strategic implications for us, with its threat to Pakistan, with its threat to Iran, with its threat to 90 percent of the exportable oil supplies in the world. And my belief is, based on evidence, that the Soviets have been somewhat chastened and surprised by the strong reaction in the other nations in the world, as exemplified by the U.N. vote, and also that other countries have rallied along with us to lead action that would restrain the Soviets repeating this in the future

With the decontrol of natural gas being assured over a long, carefully phased period of time, we've had much more plentiful supplies of natural gas throughout the Nation, more production and more plentiful supplies. And the phased decontrol of oil, in my opinion, will enhance the production of domestic oil. We now have more oil drilling rigs, natural gas drilling rigs combined, in operation than we've had in the last 21 years. And I think there's a new sense of urgency extant in the Nation, which will be mirrored in the Congress, because of the Iranian and Afghanistan threats



"Meet the Press" Interview with Bill Monroe, Carl T. Rowan, David Broder, and Judy Woodruff
January 20, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Broder, in a time of crisis for our country I believe it's very important for the President not to assume, in a public way, the role of a partisan campaigner in a political contest. Our country is in a state of crisis, and this has been a consistent policy that I have maintained since the Iranians captured and held hostage Americans in Tehran. I do not consider this to be a campaign forum, "Meet the Press," and I'm not here as a partisan candidate

But it is obvious that the Soviets' actual invasion of a previously nonaligned country, an independent, freedom-loving country, a deeply religious country, with their own massive troops is a radical departure from the policy or actions that the Soviets have pursued since the Second World War. It is a direct threat because Pakistan [Afghanistan],1 formerly a buffer state between the Soviet Union and Iran and the world's oil supplies and the Hormuz Straits and the Persian Gulf, has now become kind of an arrow aiming at those crucial strategic regions of the world. So, this is a major departure by the Soviet Union from their previous actions

THE PRESIDENT. I can't predict the early end of that situation. The concern that I feel about the hostages today is just as great as it was a month ago or 2 months ago. Our policy on the Iranian capturing of our hostages has been clear and consistent. It's an abhorrent violation of every moral and ethical standard and international law. It's a criminal act: a group of terrorists, kidnapers, seizing innocent victims and holding them for attempted blackmail in an unprecedented way, supported and encouraged by government officials themselves. Our response has been clear: to protect, first of all, the short-term and long-range interests of our country; secondly, to protect the safety and the lives of the hostages themselves; third, to pursue every possible avenue of the early and safe release of our hostages; fourth, to avoid bloodshed if possible, because I have felt from the very beginning that the initiation of a military action or the causing of bloodshed would undoubtedly result in the death of the hostages; and fifth, and perhaps most difficult of all, is to arouse and to sustain the strong support by the vast majority of nations on Earth for our position as an aggrieved nation and the condemnation of the world for Iran for this direct violation of international law. It's an abhorrent act. 
I don't know when the hostages will be released, but we will maintain our intense interest in it. We will maintain ourcommitment to every possible avenue to carry out the policies I've just described to you, and we will maintain, as best we can, the full support of the rest of the world. And that concerted pressure from many sources, including the recent sanctions that we have initiated against Iran, I believe and I hope and I pray will result in the safe release of our hostages. I can't predict exactly when. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't have any apology at all for letting the Shah come here as an extremely sick person— 
THE PRESIDENT.—for treatment. The Embassy had been attacked in the past. Embassies around the world are often subjected to attacks. In every instance the Iranian officials had joined with our own people to protect the Embassy of the United States. Following the seizure of the Embassy earlier in the year, we had carried out a substantial program for the strengthening of the Embassy's defenses. After the Shah came here to the United States for treatment, and we notified the Iranian officials of that fact, we were again assured by the Iranian Prime Minister and the Iranian Foreign Minister that the Embassy would be protected. It was, indeed, protected for about 10 days, following which the Ayatollah Khomeini made a very aggressive and abusive speech. And when it was attacked by militant terrorists, the Iranians, the Iranian Government withdrew their protection for the Embassy. It was an unpredictable kind of thing. This has never been done, so far as I know, in modern history, to have a government support a terrorist act of this kind, the kidnaping of hostages, and the holding of them for attempted blackmail. 
But there was no stone unturned in our attempt to maintain relations with Iran, which is in our interest, and at the same time to protect our people.

THE PRESIDENT. That's been a constant concern of mine, Mr. Rowan. 
What we want is a unified Iran, not fragmented. We want a stable and independent Iran, and we want a secure Iran. But we cannotaccept the abhorrent act, supported by the Iranian officials, of the terrorists holding Americans hostage. We have decided to takeaction against Iran, with the presence of our naval forces to prevent injury to our hostages; and secondly, to impose, with an increasing degree of severity, sanctions against Iran that would encourage them to release the hostages. 
There has been, obviously, a new element introduced into the Iranian hostage crisis in recent weeks with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. My belief is that many of the responsible officials in Iran now see that this major threat to Iran's security and the peace of Iran is becoming paramount, and that there will be an additional effort on their part to secure the release of the hostages and remove the isolation of Iran from the rest of the civilized world. 
But I think our actions have been well considered. We have taken every element of caution about the possibility which you describe. And in my judgment, the best thing for Iran to do now is to release the hostages, to seek redress of their alleged grievances in the international fora and the courts of the individual nations, and to begin to strengthen themselves against the possible threat by the Soviets now addressed toward them in Afghanistan. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. Those sanctions will be pursued by ourselves, unilaterally, and joined in by as many of our allies as will agree. We have had very acceptable support by our allies in this imposition of sanctions against Iran, and we've had overwhelming support in the International Court of Justice and in the United Nations from many nations who've observed this situation. So, I will not postpone the imposition of sanctions



The State of the Union Address Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Congress. 
January 23, 1980

At this time in Iran, 50 Americans are still held captive, innocent victims of terrorism and anarchy. Also at this moment, massive Soviet troops are attempting to subjugate the fiercely independent and deeply religious people of Afghanistan. These two acts—one of international terrorism and one of military aggression-present a serious challenge to the United States of America and indeed to all the nations of the world. Together, we will meet these threats to peace. 
Three basic developments have helped to shape our challenges: the steady growth and increased projection of Soviet military power beyond its own borders; the overwhelming dependence of the Western democracies on oil supplies from the Middle East; and the press of social and religious and economic and political change in the many nations of the developing world, exemplified by the revolution in Iran. 
In response to the abhorrent act in Iran, our Nation has never been aroused and unified so greatly in peacetime. Our position is clear. The United States will not yield to blackmail. 
We continue to pursue these specific goals: first, to protect the present and long-range interests of the United States; secondly, to preserve the lives of the American hostages and to secure, as quickly as possible, their safe release, if possible, to avoid bloodshed which might further endanger the lives of our fellow citizens; to enlist the help of other nations in condemning this act of violence, which is shocking and violates the moral and the legal standards of a civilized world; and also to convince and to persuade the Iranian leaders that the real danger to their nation lies in the north, in the Soviet Union and from the Soviet troops now in Afghanistan, and that the unwarranted Iranian quarrel with the United States hampers their response to this far greater danger to them. 
If the American hostages are harmed, a severe price will be paid. We will never rest until every one of the American hostages are released
The crises in Iran and Afghanistan have dramatized a very important lesson: Our excessive dependence on foreign oil is a clearandpresent danger to our Nation's security. The need has never been more urgent. At long last, we must have a clear, comprehensive energy policy for the United States



United States Conference of Mayors Remarks to Mayors Attending the Conference's Winter Meeting. 
January 25, 1980

And not too far from Iran there's a little country named Afghanistan—proud, independent. They haven't been subjugated completely in 2,000 years; deeply religious. And they are being ground under an enormous military power with loss of life, executions, powerful Soviet troops fighting against the soldiers of Afghanistan, trying to stamp out freedom. It shows a vivid difference between our two countries


Leadership Conference on Civil Rights Remarks at the Annual Hubert H. Humphrey Award Dinner
January 27, 1980

The tremendous votes that took place recently in the United Nations contradicts the historical tone, when the small nations and the new nations and the weak nations and those who represented populations with black and brown and yellow people supported our position with our hostages in Iran and who condemned the Soviet Union for their invasion of Afghanistan. That would likely not have been the case a few years ago


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
January 29, 1980

I've been pleased at the support of our policies so far in both the Iranian and the Afghanistan crises, and I also was pleased less than a year ago when we were embarked on the second phase of trying to bring peace between Israel and Egypt. This also called upon the American people not only to go through a sensitive negotiating period with trust and confidence in me but also, at the conclusion of the signing of the Mideast peace treaty in May, a substantial increase in both economic and military aid for Israel and Egypt. I think it was an outstanding investment, compared to what may have been called for in the future had those two nations not been strong, viable, and at peace with one another


Return of Six Americans From Iran Remarks by Telephone With Prime Minister Ice Clark of Canada. 
January 31, 1980

[To the reporters] Well, he's very nice. He expressed his hope that the revelation of their departure was not in any way going to endanger our own hostages still being held, and pointed out accurately that they've been very supportive of us from the very beginning of the Iranian crisis



Consumer Federation of America Remarks at the Federation's Annual Conference. 
February 7, 1980

In Iran, in Asia and elsewhere throughout the world, the United States is meeting its international challenges with restraint and with resolve, and Americans have exhibited a remarkable degree of national unity and common purpose


The President's News Conference
February 13, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. Since the day our Embassy was seized in Tehran, we have had two goals: one, the safety and release of the Americans being held hostage, and the other is the protection of our national interest in this critical area of the world. Since that first day, we have pursued every possibility to achieve these goals. No stone has been left unturned in the search for a solution. 
Over the past several weeks, our efforts and our activities have become particularly delicate and intense. Recently there have been some positive signs, although experience has taught us to guard against excessive optimism. 
Since mid-November, we and the Iranian officials have been discussing with Secretary-General Waldheim of the United Nations his proposal to send a commission of inquiry to Tehran. We would support steps by the United Nations that would lead to the release of the hostages if the steps are consistent with our goals and our essential international principles. An appropriate commission with a carefully defined purpose would be a step toward resolution of this crisis. 
I know that you and the American people will understand that I cannot afford at this delicate time to discuss or to comment further upon any specific efforts that may be underway or any proposals that may be useful in ending this crisis.
THE PRESIDENT. That's ancient history, and I don't think it's appropriate or helpful for me to go into the propriety of something that happened 30 years ago
I might add one other personal point. We cannot lessen the commitment of the American people that a crisis does indeed exist as long as 50 innocent Americans are being held hostage by kidnapers. Some attenuation or lowering of the focused attention on the hostages is inevitable, but I, as President, have got to maintain the accurate image that we do have a crisis which I will not ignore until those hostages are released. I want the American people to know it, I want the Iranians to know it, I want the hostages' families and the hostages to know it, I want the world to know that I am not going to resume business as usual as a partisan campaigner out on the campaign trail until our hostages are back here, free and at home


Meeting With Student Leaders Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session. 
February 15, 1980

So, it's a part of a unilateral, multilateral, regional response to the Soviet Union, to say, "Do not go any further; withdraw your troops from this invaded country." We are not trying to bring the Soviets to their knees; we're not trying to humiliate the Soviet Union. We're trying to let them know that there is a world condemnation of what they have done. If they, with impunity, can take over this adjacent country, then my judgment is they'd be much more tempted to take a further step into Pakistan, into Iran, or into some adjacent country. I think it's excellent insurance, and I think it's needed. And we're .going to go through with it


American Legion Remarks at the Legion's Annual Conference. 
February 19, 1980

At this very moment 53 Americans are being held hostage in Iran. The long and continuous efforts to ensure the safe release of our people have now reached a particularly sensitive and intense stage. My task is to protect the interests and the principles of our Nation while we negotiate for the release of the Americans who are being held as innocent prisoners. I deeply appreciate the firmness, patience, the unity, and the will shown by almost all Americans during these days of crisis. I cannot and I will not rest until every single American is home, safe and free


Visit of President Daniel T. arap Moi of Kenya Remarks at the Welcoming Ceremony. 
February 20, 1980

We are also particularly grateful as a nation to the people of his country and to President Moi for their unswerving support for us in the trying times since the innocent American diplomats were captured by militants in Iran and held hostage. President Moi has used his influence on a political basis to intercede for those hostages held captive and has also led other deeply religious nations, on his own initiative, in calling for a day of prayer and personally led a prayer meeting in his country for the safety and wellbeing and the freedom of the American hostages. This is particularly important to us, and I want to thank him from the bottom of my heart, as the leader of our Nation, for this initiative on his part


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and News Directors. 
February 25, 1980

One day is obviously too long. But I think that there have been some encouraging developments recently, with the election of a government in Iran—at least the President—and also with the arrival there of the international commission established under the aegis of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. They have begun their meetings now, and we hope that this will be a step toward resolving the crisis

The first line of defense for any prevention of aggression is within a nation itself. And we want to have, for instance, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, and other countries to be united, to be filled with the spirit of resistance and independence, to be free of unwarranted subversion that might bring down an established government, to be secure in their own military capability. And that would be the first line of defense. 
As I said in my last press conference, we would not yield to the Soviets the choice of either terrain or tactics. We would not let the Soviets choose a particular place for a response to aggression to be mounted. And we would not let them determine the tactics to be used in resisting their future aggression. But we let the Turks and the Iranians and the Pakistanis know that if they need our help, then that help is available. 
Now, as you know, we don't have a relationship with Iran that would permit continued assistance. But my hope is that Iran will be united, free, independent, secure, and would not be subject to interference in their internal affairs from any country. I think this kind of approach is the best guarantee not to have conflict, and to preserve the peace

Visit of Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of the Federal Republic of Germany Remarks to Reporters Following a Meeting
March 5, 1980

We have been particularly involved together in recent months, after the American hostages were seized in Iran and since the Soviets have invaded Afghanistan. The Federal Republic of Germany has made its position clear both in the United Nations on several occasions, in these private consultations, and through their public actions


White House Briefing on Administration Policies Remarks to a Group of Civic and Community Leaders From New York. 
March 11, 1980

Yesterday, I spent most of my time—as I have frequently during this last 3 or 4 months—working on and assessing the situation in Iran. We had high hopes that the United Nations commission, which we helped to evolve, would be successful in their trip to Iran—that they would be able to see all of the American hostages, account for them individually and determine their condition, and to achieve their release from the militants, and then to come back with some resolution of the crisis that has been so all-possessive of me in the last few weeks. 
We have 220 million Americans who are deeply concerned about 53 people-not famous people, but human beings-and we are not only concerned about their lives, but we are concerned about their freedom. I think it's a good characteristic of a great nation to show this deep concern. And, in my opinion, we have just as much a crisis today as we did on November 4, when the hostages were first seized. And I have refrained from business as usual and partisan campaign activities that would indicate that our Nation was out of a crisis stage and returning to business as usual. 
I can't give you any prospects for immediate success, but we are ever constantly aware of this deep concern and the need for me, as the President, to address it as best I can. We've been interested in preserving the principles and ideals of our country, protecting our interests, protecting the lives and seeking the freedom of our people, and in marshaling worldwide opinion on our side to strengthen our position now and in the future.
One thing I'd like to add: I need the support of the American people. The future negotiations in the Mideast, in Iran, addressing the Afghanistan question, are not going to be easy. And to the extent that I am observed and known among foreign leaders and among our own people as speaking accurately for the American people and having your support—to that extent, it makes it much easier for me to achieve those goals which I share with you



The President's News Conference
March 14, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. We are not content for the innocent American hostages to be held by terrorists for one single day. This is an abhorrent act in direct violation not only of international law but the very Islamic principles which these militants profess to espouse and to support. We have done everything we possibly could in the last 4 months to honor the principles of our Nation, to protect the interests of our Nation, to try to preserve in every way the health and the lives of those hostages, and to work for their freedom. 
I don't know when they'll be released. We have constant negotiations and attempts to provide continuing communication with the leaders of Iran. I believe that when there's a stable government in Iran, which may possibly occur after the elections—the vote, as you know, began today. But our past few days have been characterized by bitter disappointments, because, in effect, commitments that had been made by the newly elected President and administration of Iran were not honored, because prior to these parliamentary elections they obviously do not have the authority to speak and carry out their own commitment. Whether they'll have that authority after the elections are completed I don't know. I certainly hope so.




National Conference of State Legislatures Remarks at the Advisory Conference. 
March 28, 1980

I come before you today, responsible leaders of our country, at a time of great challenge not only for our own Nation but, indeed, for the entire free world. Abroad, among other challenges I have to face personally along with you as American citizens—turmoil in Iran, aggression in Afghanistan, and many other issues that are important to all our people—while ourresolve is firm, we mustact carefully and we mustact in concert with other nations. At home we face the great challenge of inflation, fueled by excessive dependence on imported or foreign oil. But here at home we are free to act as America needs us to act, and we must choose to act for America now. We have to make hard choices, as individuals and as governments, and as a nation. Our future security literally depends upon the implementation and the observance of discipline on ourselves now


American Hostages in Iran Remarks to Reporters
April 1, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. As I'm sure you realize, we have been seeking a positive development in Iran and have had in mind the transfer of the American hostages from control of the militants to the care and protection of the Iranian Government. If this action had not been taken, or is not taken, we were considering additional sanctions against Iran and had notified the Iranian Government of that fact. 
This morning, the President of Iran has announced that the hostages' control would be transferred to the Government of Iran, which we consider to be a positive step. 
In light of that action, we do not consider it appropriate now to impose additional sanctions. We will monitor the situation very closely. We would like to see this positive development continue, and our foremost consideration and our constant effort will be devoted to the hostages and their return to this country and to freedom. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have no assurance that this will be done except that the President of Iran has announced that it will be done. 
THE PRESIDENT. We do not consider it necessary at this time to impose additional sanctions, but that is always an option open to us. The best assumption now is that the President of Iran is speaking for his government and that the hostages will indeed be transferred to the care and the protection of the government itself. 
THE PRESIDENT. I presume that we will know more about that as the circumstances develop. We do not know the exact time schedule at this moment. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we want the hostages to be released completely as soon as possible. I think the only thing I can say now is, based upon the statement of the President of Iran, that the hostages will be transferred to the care and protection of the Iranian Government. And if that is carried out, then I see no reason to impose additional sanctions against Iran at this time. 
We will assume that the President will carry out the commitment that he has made early this morning, and if that assumption is proven to be accurate, then I do not intend to impose additional sanctions. 
THE PRESIDENT. We will maintain the present restraints on trade that have already been imposed against Iran, including the holding of their assets in our country and the prohibition against any trade with Iran. But I do not consider it appropriate at this time to impose additional sanctions, since we have had, in response to our earlier message, an answer from the Government of Iran through their President that the control and the protection and the care of the hostages will be transferred from the militants to the government. 
THE PRESIDENT. We had decided to impose additional sanctions, and this fact was made known both to the public and to the Government of Iran. This was done about a week ago, and the Iranian Government has considered the entire situation, as have we. The President of Iran has made a positive step by announcing that the control of the hostages and their protection and care would be shifted to the Iranian Government, and because of that positive step, we do not intend to carry out additional sanctions against Iran at this time


Building and Construction Trades Department, AFL-CIO Remarks at the National Conference. 
April 1, 1980

I come to speak to you in a time of intense commitment on the part of all Americans to resolve successfully the challenges that present themselves to us. I was scheduled to be with you yesterday afternoon, but we were required, because of late developments in Iran, to have a National Security Council meeting. And then I met, following that, with the leaders of the House and Senate from the Democratic and Republican parties. 
As you know, the President of Iran announced early this morning that the American hostages will be transferred from the militants to the care and the protection of the Iranian Government. We have had good messages out of Iran before. This action, if taken, will be a positive step, and as the announced transfer takes place, we will defer imposing additional sanctions which we had planned to take for the time being. We will continue the existing sanctions that have already been in effect against Iran. 
We will continue to work for the earliest possible release of the innocent American hostages. And this afternoon, I would like to set the record straight on one issue. No one in the Government of the United States has apologized to anyone in the Government of Iran because— [applause] —and the reason is that we have nothing for which to apologize. And another point I'd like to make, to set the record straight: We have not condoned nor expressed any understanding of or approval of the seizure by the militants of the innocent American hostages in Tehran, nor will we ever condone or approve of the seizing of our hostages in Tehran.
In Iran, we have been restrained and patient. And patience is not an ordinary characteristic of American people, but we place a high value on human life, on the human lives of 53 innocent Americans, and we also place a high value on their personal freedom. It is not a sign of weakness when a powerful nation like ours is patient in order to preserve precious American lives. 
I have worked day and night, literally. I was up this morning at 4:30, and this has not been the first time that we have worked during the night for the safe release of these innocent Americans who are held hostage. But our patience is not endless, and the Iranian Government must realize that failure to bring this outrage to an end is directly contrary to the best interests not only of ourselves and the hostages but also contrary to the best interests of the Iranian people. 
In that same region, Iran and other nations of the world face the ominous threat of Soviet aggression. Led by the United States, almost all nations, 104 of us, have condemned the invasion of Afghanistan and have called for the Soviets' withdrawal of their troops from that peace-loving and deeply religious country

Sanctions Against Iran Remarks Announcing U.S. Actions. 
April 7, 1980

Ever since Iranian terrorists imprisoned American Embassy personnel in Tehran early in November, these 50 men and women—their safety, their health, and their future—have been our central concern. We've made every effort to obtain their release on honorable, peaceful, and humanitarian terms, but the Iranians have refused to release them or even to improve the inhumane conditions under which these Americans are being held captive. 
The events of the last few days have revealed a new and significant dimension in this matter. The militants controlling the Embassy have stated they are willing to turn the hostages over to the Government of Iran, but the Government has refused to take custody of the American hostages. This lays bare the full responsibility of the Ayatollah Khomeini and the Revolutionary Council for the continued illegal and outrageous holding of the innocent hostages. The Iranian Government can no longer escape full responsibility by hiding behind the militants at the Embassy. 
It must be made clear that the failure to release the hostages will involve increasingly heavy costs to Iran and to its interests. I have today ordered the following steps. 
First, the United States of America is breaking diplomatic relations with the Government of Iran. The Secretary of State has informed the Government of Iran that its Embassy and consulates in the United States are to be closed immediately. All Iranian diplomatic and consular officials have been declared persona non grata and must leave this country by midnight tomorrow. 
Second, the Secretary of the Treasury will put into effect official sanctions prohibiting exports from the United States to Iran, in accordance with the sanctions approved by 10 members of the United Nations Security Council on January 13 in the resolution which was vetoed by the Soviet Union. Although shipment of food and medicine were not included in the U.N. Security Council vote, it is expected that exports even of these items to Iran will be minimal or nonexistent. 
Third, the Secretary of Treasury will make a formal inventory of the assets of the Iranian Government, which were frozen by my previous order, and also will make a census or an inventory of the outstanding claims of American citizens and corporations against the Government of Iran. This accounting of claims will aid in designing a program against Iran for the hostages, for the hostage families, and other U.S. claimants. We are now preparing legislation, which will be introduced in the Congress, to facilitate processing and paying of these claims. 
Fourth, the Secretary of Treasury [State] and the Attorney General will invalidate all visas issued to Iranian citizens for future entry into the United States, effective today. We will not reissue visas, nor will we issue new visas, except for compelling and proven humanitarian reasons or where the national interest of our own country requires. This directive will be interpreted very strictly. 
In order to minimize injury to the hostages, the United States has acted at all times with exceptional patience and restraint in this crisis. We have supported Secretary-General Waldheim's activities under the U.N. Security Council mandate to work for a peaceful solution. We will continue to consult with our allies and other friendly governments on the steps we are now taking and on additional measures which may be required. 
I amcommitted to resolving this crisis. I amcommitted to the safe return of the American hostages and to the preservation of our national honor. The hostages and their families, indeed all of us in America, have lived with the reality and the anguish of their captivity for 5 months. The steps I have ordered today are those that are necessary now. Other action may become necessary if these steps do not produce the prompt release of the hostages


American Society of Newspaper Editors Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the Society's Annual Convention. 
April 10, 1980

Nowhere do we face the challenges I've just described more directly than we do in Iran. No single situation so aggravates the American people, so tests our maturity, so tries our patience, so challenges our unity, as does the continued captivity of American hostages in the Tehran Embassy. No other single event seems so clearly to mirror the disorder of our times. This disregard for diplomatic propriety and for international law is a special threat to the small nation, the weak nation, the nation without economic or military or political power or influence. And it also comprises a part of the competing pressures on a great and a powerful nation like ours. 
This crisis calls on us to act with courage and also with wisdom that will both produce results and preserve life. I'm deeply proud of the steady strength that has been demonstrated in America in dealing with the irresponsible Iranian authorities, who've been unwilling to act or unable to carry out their frequent, solemn commitments. The leaders of the Iranian Government lack the cohesion and resolve to bring order to their own chaotic land or to decide on a basis for ending this illegal detention of hostages, which has created international crisis. 
For long months, ours has been a restraint of strength, despite outrageous provocation. I do not regret that restraint, which was designed to protect American lives and to explore with Iranian Government officials and with United Nations officials and with mediators working with us a way to resolve this crisis peacefully. But it has become necessary, because Iran would not act in accordance with international law and with their own interests, for us to act again. The steps I've taken this week—to end diplomatic relations and to impose sanctions—are firm and substantive, and we hope that they will be persuasive. 
America will continue the careful and considered exercise of its power. We will pursue every, and I repeat, every legal use of that power, to bring our people home, free and safe. But the hard, sad reality is that a small number of zealots, engaged in a power struggle within Iran, are using the innocent American hostages for their own advancement, with serious adverse consequences to all Iranian people. 
In the interests of the people of Iran and of their possible future as a unified and peaceful nation living in freedom, it is imperative that the Iranian Government resolve this crisis. Every day that the crisis continues, Iran is further isolated from the rest of the world. Every day that the American Embassy remains a prison pushes Iran further into lawlessness, down and down the spiral of disorder. With a return of rationality, international lawlessness need not be Iran's fate; bankruptcy, political as well as moral, need not be Iran's future. 
In 1946 the United States stood firm against Soviet occupation of northern Iran, against Soviet-sponsored subversion in Greece, against Soviet demands on Turkey. Historically, American strength has been used to help the countries of the Persian Gulf area to protect their stability and to retain their own sovereignty

The course we pursue, therefore, in this turbulent world is steady, firm, and fair. It's the course of a strong, stable nation practicing mature restraint, but insisting on justice—the policy we pursue in Iran. It's the course of a resolute nation, hopeful of good relations, but determined to deter aggression—the course we pursue in dealing with the Soviet Union. It's the course of the peacemaker—the same role to which the United States is committed in the Middle East and indeed throughout the world. It's the course of an understanding nation, sensitive to the tides of change and to therights and the needs of all people—America's rightful approach, proper approach to the revolutionary climate in which a new world is now coming to life.

THE PRESIDENT. The commitments were made directly to us and through intermediaries that several things would happen: first, that frequent and adequate visits could be made to the American hostages to determine their physical and their psychological well-being, to assure that they were getting adequate medical care and were living under conditions that were humane. 
We also had firm commitments, including a report to us from the highest Iranian officials in the Government, that through a unanimous vote within the Revolutionary Council, as approved by the students and approved by Khomeini, that the hostages would be transferred from control of the terrorists—students to the Government itself. 
These kinds of commitments were made from time to time. And invariably, before the commitments were carried out, they were either aborted, or those responsible for carrying them out, through timidity, failed to keep their commitments. 
I cannot say that we have proof that the terrorists who hold the hostages in the compound are controlled by the Soviet Union. The Tudeh party in Iran is relatively small in number. In recent months they have been highly supportive of Khomeini and the mullahs and those that are close to him, possibly as a political ploy to seek some better treatment from the Ayatollah Khomeini. 
The Soviets in recent weeks have had a very strong and constant radio propaganda effort going into Iran, expressing their approval of the actions taken by the militants in the compound. We complained to the Soviet Union strongly and repeatedly, and for awhile that propaganda effort was assuaged. In recent days, however, it has built up again
I talked to some of the European leaders very recently. Yesterday and today, the Foreign Ministers of many nations met in Lisbon. They have decided to go to the Iranian officials to demand that the hostages be released immediately and to insist upon a time schedule for the release of the American hostages. 
Options that are available to them if such action is not forthcoming would have to be chosen by those autonomous and independent nations and their leaders. We have suggested such things as the imposition of the sanctions as voted by the U.N. Security Council, blocked legally by the veto of the Soviet Union, and also the withdrawal of their diplomatic personnel from Iran, or possibly the breaking of relations with Iran




Meeting With Leaders of Ethnic and Fraternal Organizations Remarks During a White House Briefing. 
April 11, 1980

Our country is faced with tests of strength and tests of courage and tests of our national will and national unity on a daily basis. We've been tested lately by the capture and the holding of American hostages in Iran, by the invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet troops. We are being tested by the first realization that our Nation does have limits on energy supplies, and we face an unprecedented level of inflation which has swept the world


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
April 11, 1980

Obviously, there are many other things which concern me as President. I have been involved with the test of our Nation in Iran and Afghanistan, in dealing with the Mideast peace negotiations and, of course, with the energy question and others on the domestic scene

THE PRESIDENT. Well here again, we have been extremely patient. We've tried to use the services of our own direct negotiations, via public statements, intermediaries, such as some of the European communities and their embassies, the United Nations, and some private citizens, to negotiate with the Iranians to secure the release of the hostages. 
On a number of occasions, we have had the absolute, firm commitment from top Iranian officials that the hostages would be transferred from control of the terrorists to the Government and then released. These promises have not been honored, either because they were not made in good faith or because of timidity or incapability on the part of the officials to deliver what they promised. 
We obviously have reserved for ourselves theright to use any means permitted under international law. And since we are a seriously aggrieved party, with our own nationals being held and our own Embassy grounds being taken, this would not foreclose the option of using military force if I decide it's necessary
THE PRESIDENT. It's hard to quantify the impact. The Iranian economy is in very bad shape. The shipment of oil from their country is at a very low level. In the last few months, it has averaged less than a million and a half barrels of oil per day, and in the last week or two, it has been much lower than that. 
Their military capability has been attenuated severely. Not only have we stopped the shipment of military equipment and spare parts to the Iranians, but also many of our European allies have joined in this embargo of similar equipment. 
It's hard to predict that unilateral sanctions on the part of the United States would be adequate to force them to release the hostages. I think our experience so far has indicated to the contrary. We still have additional capability of imposing punitive action or coercive action against Iran short of exercising our military options. We are considering what we will do next
I don't think there are any American weapons at all in Afghanistan. I think there have been a few grenades, I understand, found in Afghanistan, but those were derived from previous sales made to Iran in years gone by. 
So, my own judgment is that it's proper for us to both conduct and to discuss aid that we are giving to the refugees. And there are now probably 650,000 refugees in Pakistan, out of Afghanistan, and maybe more than 100,000 more in Iran and other countries—maybe a total of 800,000 or more. We can give aid to them and support. But I think the Afghan freedom fighters are doing very well on their own in getting weapons away from their own previous armed forces and also perhaps some from the Soviet invaders


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Foreign Correspondents. 
April 12, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I think the most important aspect of the Iranian and the Afghanistan problems is not the disappointment that we feel with our allies, but the consistency and unanimity that we all share, in this country and in Europe, about the threat to peace that has been put forward, not only by the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan but by the terrorist attack on our Embassy and its officials in Iran. There has been a unanimous condemnation of these two acts as a threat to peace. 
Our country has obviously moved forward much more aggressively in Iran, because our people are directly involved. We have tried for the last more than 5 months, through every peaceful means, through every diplomatic means, to bring about a resolution of this crisis, to protect the honor and integrity of our country, and to secure the safe release of our people back to freedom. 
We've now found that because of many reasons the Iranian Government, what there is of it, has not been able to deliver on their commitments to transfer the hostages to safe care and then to release them altogether. 
We do need the full and aggressive support of our allies. What we ask specifically of them is that they carry out now two basic proposals. One is to honor the sanctions against Iran that were voted and supported by all of them in the United Nations Security Council earlier this year. The final action of the U.N. Security Council was stopped by a Soviet veto. And secondly, if this should prove to be unsuccessful, then to join us in strong diplomatic moves against Iran, to show them that we all do stand together in this condemnation of terrorism, a threat to our country, to all of them, and particularly the smaller nations who don't have the economic or political or military power to protect its interests. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we do, and we don't have much time left. The American people are ready and eager to see this matter resolved. Under international law we are a seriously aggrieved party, and we have a breadth of options available to us—economic, diplomatic, military options as well. 
To the extent that the allies can join with us in making effective the diplomatic and economic pressures that might cause the Iranians to release the hostages, then we can forgo the requirement that we take additional, stronger action. We prefer to keep our action nonbelligerent in nature, but we reserve theright to take whateveractionisnecessary to secure the safe release of our hostages. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, it's not a matter of many weeks or certainly not a matter of months. It's not appropriate for me now to set a specific date. But we have sent to the heads of nations, all of those represented by you, a specific date, at which time we would expect this common effort to be successful. 
THE PRESIDENT. Our action would be very strong and forceful and might very well involve military means. 
What Mr. Powell said is consistent with my policy that we do intend to exhaust not only our own diplomatic and economic action—and there are other actions of an economic nature that we can take against Iran—but also to exhaust the common effect of concerted action on the part of our allies, which we have requested very clearly both privately and publicly. And following that, we will be required to take additional action which may very well involve military means. 
But if our hostages are injured or if any of them are killed, then we would not delay in taking much stronger action of an incisive nature. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think I've answered that question already by saying that economic sanctions, as supported by all of your nations in the U.N. Security Council, would be one of the steps, and we would expect additional diplomatic steps to be taken unless an immediate favorable response is received from the Iranians.
I have talked to the leaders of the countries represented here—some within the last 2 or 3 days, some within the last 2 or 3 weeks—and have made it plain to them that the experience that we have suffered with the Iranians is constant misleading statements, constant delay, constant failure to carry out commitments made, either because of a deliberate attempt to mislead or because of timidity and a failure to have authority enough to carry out a commitment even if it was made in good conscience. 
But I think that we have now an opportunity, if strong and concerted action is taken by our allies in Europe and our friends and supported by additional economic measures that we are now contemplating, to avoid the military action or other stronger belligerent action that would be always an open option for us. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think anyone could find fault with me because I have not been adequately patient. We have seen 53 innocent Americans held by terrorists, first of all, and then later supported by and condoned by the official Government of Iran in complete contravention to every standard of human decency and morality and in contravention of diplomatic procedures and international law. This has been a situation condemned on two occasions by the entire membership of the U.N. Security Council; the International Court of Justice has confirmed this opinion. 
And we have been extremely patient. Our patience is runningout. And if I have been criticized in my own country for any aspect of my behavior, it's been because we have been too patient, not too precipitous. 
THE PRESIDENT. I have tried to avoid making that choice, and I think it would be inappropriate for me in a public forum to describe what I have done. But I don't think that, at least at this date, we have taken any action or made any decision that is inimical to our Nation's best interest and also to the interest of the hostages and their lives. 
Obviously, the paramount interest has to be what's best for our Nation and its security, but we are trying to honor that commitment without endangering the lives of the hostages. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't see any incompatibility between the two. I have devoted an enormous amount of time to the hostage question. It never leaves my mind for any waking moment. It's a question and a problem that permeates the consciousness of our entire Nation.
What we have tried to do is to act with moral decency, with restraint, with sensitivity about the revolutionary and chaotic nature of the situation in Iran, to protect our Nation's interest, to honor as best we could the sensitivities of other countries, and to protect the lives of the hostages. This is a very complicated question. At the same time, obviously, I have to deal with the normal matters that fall on the shoulders of a President here in the Oval Office, and in addition, I have been managing the campaign for reelection. But I have never let the Iranian question suffer because of unwarranted attention to a campaign effort. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. Some of the moderates in Tehran, I think, have made an honest effort to secure the transfer of the hostages from control of the terrorists and subsequently to achieve their release to freedom. 
Quite often we have been informed, on several occasions, that the Revolutionary Council has made a unanimous decision to make this transfer, that the transfer was approved by the militants in the compound, and we have been informed by the top Iranian officials that this action had the approval of Khomeini himself. Subsequent events have proven that this degree of unanimity which seems to be required under President Bani-Sadr's government has not been achieved. 
It has been a very frustrating experience, but we've not written off any element of possible support that might be available to make the crisis come to an end.
THE PRESIDENT. No, the terms are not totally different. It's the Soviet action which has violated moral principles and human decency and international law. It's the Iranian terrorist action which has violated moral decency and international law and human principles

think in action concerning Iran we have let our allies and our friends know very clearly what our position is. We've tried to keep them informed about action that we would take before it was taken



National 4-H Club Remarks to Delegates Attending the Club's 50th Anniversary Conference. 
April 17, 1980

I spend a lot of time, day and night, worrying about the 53 Americans who are held in Iran and trying to deal with the changing circumstances there to ensure that we protect our national honor and the principles of our Nation and also protect the lives of those hostages and work toward a thing that we value very highly, and that's freedom


The President's News Conference
April 17, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. Since last November, 53 Americans have been held captive in Tehran, contrary to every principle of international law and human decency. The United States began to implement a series of nonviolent but punitive steps, designed to bring about the release of our hostages. 
In January, we received information and signals from the Iranian authorities that they were prepared to enter into serious discussions to bring about the release of the hostages. At that time the United States decided to defer additional sanctions, and then these discussions resulted in commitments from the top authorities in Iran, including a transfer of the hostages to Government control, to be followed by their release. 
These commitments were not fulfilled. Earlier this month, April the 7th, I announced a series of economic and political actions designed to impose additional burdens on Iran because their Government was now directly involved in continuing this act of international terrorism. 
This process is moving forward. We've imposed economic sanctions, and we have broken diplomatic relations with Iran. Recently a number of other nations have recalled their ambassadors, and these countries are now considering sanctions they may be prepared to invoke in the near future. 
Even while these deliberations continue, officials in Iran talk about not resolving the hostage issue until July or even later. We are beyond the time for gestures. We want our people to be set free. Accordingly, I am today ordering an additional set of actions. 
First, I am prohibiting all financial transfers by persons subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to any person or entity in Iran, except those directly related to the gathering of news and family remittances to the hostages. * As of today, any such transaction will become a criminal act. 
Second, all imports from Iran to the United States will be barred. 
 Third, I intend to exercise my statutory authority to protect American citizens abroad by prohibiting travel to Iran, and by prohibiting any transactions between Americans and foreign persons relating to such travel or the presence of Americans in Iran. Again, this authority will not now be used to interfere with theright of the press to gather news. However, it is my responsibility and my obligation, given the situation in Iran, to callon American journalists and news-gathering organizations to minimize, as severely as possible, their presence and their activities in Iran. 
Fourth, I am ordering that all military equipment previously purchased by the Government of Iran, which I had previously impounded, be made available for use by the United States military forces or for sale to other countries. 
And finally, I will ask Congress for discretionary authority to pay reparations to the hostages and to their families out of the more than $8 billion in frozen Iranian assets in the United States. These assets will be available to satisfy contract and other commercial claims of American firms against Iranian Government entities and to reimburse claims of the United States for the heavy military and other costs we have incurred because of Iran's illegal actions. 
If a constructive Iranian response is not forthcoming soon, the United States should and will proceed with other measures. We will legally forbid shipments of food and medicine, and the United Nations Charter, as you know, stipulates interruption of communications as a legitimate sanction. Accordingly, I am prepared to initiate consultations with the member nations of Intelsat [International Telecommunications Satellite Consortium] to bar Iran's use of international communications facilities. 
The measures which I am announcing today are still nonbelligerent in nature. They are a continuation of our efforts to resolve this crisis by peaceful means. The authorities in Iran should realize, however, that the availability of peaceful measures, like the patience of the American people, is runningout. I am compelled to repeat what I have said on previous occasions: Other actions are available to the United States and may become necessary if the Government of Iran refuses to fulfill its solemn international responsibility. The American hostages must be freed. 
THE PRESIDENT. From the very beginning of the crisis in Iran, brought about by the seizure of our hostages, I have had two goals in mind from which we have never deviated: first of all, to protect the interests of our country and its principles and standards; and secondly, and along with it on an equal basis, to protect the lives of the hostages and to work as best I could under the most difficult possible circumstances to secure the release of our hostages safely and to freedom. 
We have had three options available to us: economic, political, and military. So far, we have only exercised the economic and the political measures—in the Court of Justice, in-the United Nations, in our own economic actions which are now inflicting punishment on Iran's economy, and in the marshaling of support among other countries. 
I can't predict to you exactly what other nations will do. In recent days, I have communicated with almost all of the major nations' leaders, asking them to take peaceful action, economic and political, to join with us in convincing Iran that they are becoming increasingly isolated from the rest of the civilized world and increasingly vulnerable to dissension and fragmentation within and to danger from without, particularly the Soviet Union-the north of Iran. 
Recently, our allies and friends have withdrawn their ambassadors to decide what they should do in the future. I understand from some of the leaders that next week they will have another meeting to decide what further steps to take, now that Bani-Sadr, the President of Iran, and others have refused to takeaction to release the hostages after our allies had demanded directly that Iran take this action. 
If this additional set of sanctions that I've described to you today and the concerted action of our allies is not successful, then the only next step available that I can see would be some sort of military action, which is the prerogative and theright of the United States under these circumstances. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have considered extending the embargo to food and drugs, which is obviously an item that we could include. We, first of all, are complying with the United Nations Security Council definition of sanctions, and we are encouraging, now, our allies to take similar action. 
Secondly, because of decisions made by us, the attitude of the American people, the attitude of shippers of food and drugs, this trade is practically nonexistent. As I pointed out to you today, unless there is immediate action on the part of Iran, these items and the interruption of communications are still available to us for a decision by me. 
THE PRESIDENT. It depends on three factors. One is the effectiveness of the accumulation of economic and political sanctions that we have taken against Iran. Secondly, it depends upon the effectiveness of the sanctions to be imposed upon Iran by other nations in the world, including some of our key allies. And thirdly and most importantly, of course, it depends upon the response of Iran to these actions and the condemnation of the rest of the world.
I do not feel it appropriate for me to set a specific time schedule for the imposition of further actions, which may include military action, but it's an option available to me. 
I think our key allied leaders understand the time frame under which we are acting and making our plans, and their decisions next week, I think, will be colored, perhaps, by the messages that I have exchanged with them, both by cable and by direct telephone conversations, which continue. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would think that would be an excessive time for us to wait. 
THE PRESIDENT. That's a balance that I will have to assess and on which make the ultimate decision. I have not discussed specific military steps with our allies that I might take. I think they are familiar, through news reports and through just commonsense analysis of those available to us, that the interruption of commerce with Iran is a kind of step that would be available. We announced in November, I think November the 20th, that this was one of those steps that we would reserve for ourselves to take in the future. I think we used the phrase, "interruption of commerce with Iran." 
It would be severe in its consequences for Iran and much less severe for any particular customer of Iran. Because of sanctions against Iran and because of the fragmented nature of their own economic system and because of their inability to buy adequate spare parts and continue their exploratory operations of the production of oil, their shipments of oil in the international markets have dropped precipitously. 
So, a total interruption of Iranian oil shipments to other countries would not be a devastating blow to those countries. It would certainly be an inconvenience; it would certainly be serious. And we have been trying to avoid that kind .of action, and we are still attempting to avoid that kind of action. But I cannot preclude that option for the future if it becomes necessary. 
And the particular instance to which you refer in Wisconsin was a time when we had negotiated for many weeks in anticipation of such an announcement that the hostages would be transferred to control of the Government and subsequently released. That decision came through official action by the Iranian Government, the Revolutionary Council. President Bani-Sadr made the announcement himself early in the morning our time, about noontime Iranian time. It was a 
This year, almost in a unique way, we've had additional responsibilities. I think it's been 25 or 30 years, for instance, since an incumbent Democratic President had to run a political campaign while he was in office. I don't deplore that. Theright of my opponents to run is theirs. But that's an additional complicating factor. It was obviously an additional burden for our entire Nation, not just for me, to have American hostages captured in Iran and to have the Soviet Union invade Afghanistan, which was a departure from 25 years of policy on their part not to use their own military forces to cross the borders into a previously undominated country. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes, it would unless they had received a specific permit either from the State Department or the Attorney General [Treasury Department]. * 
THE PRESIDENT. The fact is that, I guess, historically there has been a fairly substantial level of trade between the Soviet Union and Iran. Before the recent revolution, there were plans afoot for substantial increased shipments of natural gas from Iran into the Soviet Union in exchange for the barter of goods and perhaps hard cash. 
The rail lines and the road system which interconnects Iran and the Soviet Union are quite limited in their capacity. They may be used now at capacity; I don't really know the specifics about that. But I think that the quantity of goods that would be interrupted by a possible blockade, which I'm not predicting now specifically will take place, could not possibly be filled or replaced by the limited transportation routes by land, either from Turkey or Iraq or the Soviet Union, certainly not from Afghanistan, at this time. 

Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From Pennsylvania. 
April 18, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. We had a meeting in the Oval Office that morning, beginning at 5, because of the extraordinary circumstances that surrounded the developments up until that time. The Iranian Revolutionary Council and the terrorists and the President of Iran had all given me word, and it had been made public that a decision would be made about whether or not the hostages would be transferred. 
At noon, Iranian time, Bani-Sadr, the President, was to make his speech announcing their decision. He announced that the hostages would be transferred to the control of the Government, the first step to their ultimate release. I think the news media was alerted, and all of my administration was alerted; in fact, the entire world's attention was focused on Iran. And I think it was a completely appropriate thing for me to announce to the American people what the decision of Iran was. 
We have always looked upon any pronouncement from Iran, from a fragmented section of authorities, as being highly suspect. But this was the first time that we had had a triple commitment to progress: the President, the Revolutionary Council, and the militant terrorists themselves
THE PRESIDENT. We do have a concern, obviously, that Iran stay united and secure and free and independent as a nation. We share that desire with the people of Iran, even including those that have condoned the taking of our own hostages. We have cautioned Iran directly and through every possible intermediary about the adverse consequences on their own Government and on their own nation if they continue this act of international terrorism against the American hostages. This is a concern that's been expressed by the United Nations Security Council, unanimously, twice, by the International Court of Justice, and by the general world opinion. 
Now, of course, our allies are beginning to decide that because of the threat to their own interests and the supplies of oil from the Persian Gulf region, that they themselves should apply cautionary sanctions against Iran. I don't know what their actions will be next week.
THE PRESIDENT. I don't have any way to influence what Senator Kennedy might do or might not do. What I've been doing this year, in addition to my regular duties and the extraordinary duties brought about by the Iran and Afghanistan crises, is to try to run the campaign as best I could—not in carefully selected States, but nationwide

THE PRESIDENT. We have two interrelated concerns that can't be separated: One is to protect the national honor and the interest of the United States, and the other is to protect the lives of the hostages and to secure their freedom. And it's not possible in my own mind to separate those two, nor do I attempt to separate them. 
So far, we have been successful in two of those elements—protecting our Nation's honor and the lives of the hostages. We have been unsuccessful in gaining their freedom. This is a constant preoccupation of mine. I never spend a waking moment without being concerned about those hostages and their families. But I can't separate the two, one from another. 
THE PRESIDENT. What I have said is-to you just then—I don't see how I could separate the two and say one is more important than the other. The hostages are in danger, and they have been in danger since the very beginning. There have been some very radical statements made by the militants in recent weeks, concerning the death of the hostages and so forth, that have not been contradicted immediately by either the Government officials or Ayatollah Khomeini. 
In the past, when the terrorists made some threat of that kind, either the President of the country or Khomeini have always immediately made a contradictory statement. That change in apparent attitude there concerns me deeply, but I am not predicting, of course, that the hostages will be killed or injured. I hope and pray that they won't.



Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From the Westinghouse Broadcasting Company, Inc.
April 18, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. We've got an extraordinary collection now, unfortunately, of both domestic and foreign policy matters that are extremely important to our country. In many ways they are interrelated. The Iranian hostages crisis, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan threatens the Mideast and the Persian Gulf region, from which comes a lot of our energy, our oil, and the oil prices, that more than doubled last year, have a direct impact on the inflation rate here and, therefore, interests rates

THE PRESIDENT. I don't think anybody could have been more patient or more understanding or more determined to explore every possibility of getting our hostages released than I have. If I've been criticized most for any one aspect of the Iranian crisis, it's being too patient and too understanding, not only of terrorists who are now holding kidnaped victims who are innocent but also, recently, of a government of a nation, unprecedented in human history, who actually condone and support this act of international terrorism. 
There have obviously been mistakes made in the past in dealing with Iran. We've made mistakes in dealing with all nations on Earth, and they've made mistakes in dealing with us. It's inevitable in complicated international affairs. But I am not going to apologize to a group of terrorists who have besmirched our own Nation and violated every standard of international decency and international law. To bring our Nation to its knees for a 'false apology is something that I will never do
There's one more point I'd like to make on this inflation issue. We have advocated a balanced budget. Senator Kennedy is well known as the largest spender perhaps in the history of the United States Senate, and the only reductions in expenditure that I know he has advocated is cuts in the defense budget. This is exactly the wrong time to cut our Nation's ability to defend itself, with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and with the Iranian question as well. We need to strengthen our Nation's defense within the bounds of a balanced budget and giving very careful attention to those who need it

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. A year before the Shah came to this country, we had over a thousand people assigned to the Embassy in Tehran; it was one of the largest embassies in the world. After the Shah was overthrown by the revolution, we reduced that number down, as you know, to 53 when the hostages were captured. And we also went in and completely renovated the Embassy and strengthened it considerably. 
There is no embassy in the world built like a fortress enough to withstand an armed attack unless you have the protection of the foreign country where the Embassy is located. We had direct commitments, even after the Shah came to this country for medical treatment, from the Prime Minister of Iran and from the Foreign Minister of Iran that our Embassy would be defended. And on that basis, we were surprised, but we were not able to defend the Embassy when the attackers took it and the Government, in effect, looked the other way. 
Recently there's been a different circumstance, where these terrorists have offered to let the hostages be released to the Government, and the Government, in effect, has refused to accept them because they could not get a unanimous vote. So, in effect, now you have the legitimate constitutional Government of Iran officially condoning and even supporting this international act of terrorism. This is what concerns us so deeply. 
But we did the best we could, with a careful and reasonable approach, to minimize the prospect of the hostages being taken and the Embassy taken over, but we could not defend it with the support of the Government going to the terrorists instead of protecting us as they should have. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. There are 50 in the Embassy, and 3 others are in their state department, their Foreign Ministry. 
THE PRESIDENT. I pray several times a day that the hostages will survive and be returned to freedom. 
Iran is a fractured country. The President of Iran, the Foreign Minister of Iran want the hostages released, because they want to repair what's happening in Iran to their own country. The Ayatollah Khomeini does not want the hostages released. I've had several reports lately that he says that the hostages would not be released until after this election year is over in the United States. Other officials in the Revolutionary Council have said that the hostages would not be considered for release until July or August. As you know, they are delaying even the election of their parliament, which will ultimately make the decision. 
So, you have a range of people who want to get the hostages out now and who did not think they should ever be released, including their own President, and you have other people who do not want the hostages to be released within the next 5 or 6 months. 
THE PRESIDENT. There's an intense hatred of the United States of America itself, brought about by the last 30 years of administration by the Shah, who was a friend of our country during all those years, beginning even when President Eisenhower was in office. And I think that burning hatred of the United States and of the Shah is combined in the minds of some, like the Ayatollah Khomeini. These terrorists inside our Embassy compound are followers of his, and I would guess that among the couple of hundred who are involved now in the holding of our hostages, there would be differences of opinion among them. 
We derive every possible degree of information and advice and counsel among professors and former residents of Iran who specialize in Islamic thinking and in the Iranian attitudes, to try to pattern my own actions. And I have spent hundreds of hours, literally, studying Iran and the composition of its people and the religious and political attitudes, the character of specific people who are involved, so that I could make the proper judgments accordingly. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. We've gone through a period of giving Iran every possible opportunity to resolve this crisis without bloodshed and without military action. We've been patient, exceptionally patient. On occasion we have had direct, unequivocal promises that the hostages would be turned over to the Government and later released, even from the Revolutionary Council and the terrorists and the President, all at the same time. But then the Ayatollah Khomeini reversed all of them and refused to release the hostages.




Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters From Pennsylvania. 
April 19, 1980


Until recently, the Government professed not to play a responsible role in the holding of the American hostages, that it was being done by—they call them students, I call them terrorists—who were not controlled by the Government. But in the more recent weeks, the terrorists themselves had announced they would turn over the hostages to the Revolutionary Council if it so demanded. At one time, the President and also the Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, Bani-Sadr, did announce early one morning, our time, that the hostages would be transferred to the Government control and that the militants and the Ayatollah Khomeini had agreed. Then two members of the Revolutionary Council decided to change their position, and the entire effort fell through, contrary to what we had expected. This puts the Government directly involved in condoning and supporting the holding of the hostages, since they have refused to accept the hostages when the militants offered to turn them over. 
The other part of your question about the relationship between our national interests, the national honor on the one hand, and the hostages' lives on the other has never been separated in my mind. The two are directly interrelated. If I should do anything to lessen the importance paid by us to the hostages' lives and safety and freedom, it would obviously be a reflection on our own Nation's principles, that we value a human life, we value human freedom, that we are a country with compassion, and that we are not callous about the value of the lives of those 53 hostages. 
So, I have never tried to separate what was best for the hostages on the one hand, from what is best for our country on the other, and I don't intend to. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, we are not close to war. Ever since November the 20th, we have announced that we reserve theright to take whateveractions are available to us under international law. We are the subject, as a nation, through our Embassy, of invasion of American territory—the Embassy compound is American territory American nationals, citizens, have been captured by international terrorists. So, under international law, we have theright to act as we choose to redress those grievances, just as though our continental United States was invaded. 
I have so far been extremely patient, and I have been pleased and somewhat surprised at the patience of the American people because they know that the hostages' lives are at stake. 
Our assessments of possible military action ought not to be discussed directly and individually by me and specifically by me, but I think the statements that we have made ever since November have been that we would reserve theright, for instance, to interrupt commerce going to and from Iran. I think that is as far as I would like to go at this point. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have had reports from other nations, diplomats, that in their conversations with Khomeini's closest advisers, he has stated that this was one of his objectives. And it now appears that the Iranian parliament may not even be having elections until maybe a month from now, the middle of May or even later. Following that, the parliament would have to be organized for the first time in Iran's history, and some of the clerics who are likely to control the Majles, as it is called, have stated that they would be in no hurry to consider the subject of the American hostages. 
What we are trying to do is to expedite this process in every possible way, through our own restraint or sanctions against Iran and through the actions that our allies might take .as well. There will be decisions made among other countries, important trade partners of Iran and friends of ours, within the next week or 10 days, and I think if Iran sees that they are not only suffering from a breach with us, but face the prospect of being further and further isolated in the world from the other civilized nations, that this would be an additional factor that might induce them to act more quickly. 
THE PRESIDENT. I know. Well, I have refrained from the latter. I have not foreclosed the option on the former for two reasons. One is that there's an extraordinary circumstance of very serious crises that afflict our Nation now—the Iranian crisis, which we've just covered, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the necessity for me to act as a world leader and coordinating, as best I can, America's relation with all other nations throughout the world who want to help us, in varying degrees of importance, the very high inflation rates and interest rates which are impacting adversely on our economy, the dealing with Congress on matters of supreme importance, like energy. These kinds of things, collectively, do require my presence here in the White House more than they have any time before in my Presidency, or maybe even in a few preceding Presidencies, at least. 
I would just like to say finally, in answer to this question, that the people have been extraordinarily sound and patient and wise in dealing with the Soviet Union, in dealing with the Iranian problem, in dealing with inflation, in dealing with high interest rates. It's unbelievable almost, looking back on political history, that an incumbent President could have done as well as I have, particularly not out campaigning. But I think the American people see that we're in it together. It takes a team effort to correct it, and there's no doubt in my mind that a majority of the American people will support a Democratic nominee in November



Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters of Harte-Hanks Communications. 
April 23, 1980

I'm not trying to project a tie vote in Pennsylvania as a victory; I understand that with about 30 or 40 thousand votes still to be counted, there's only a 3,000 vote difference. But I think that because of the very adverse economic news and the problems with the Iranian Government holding our hostages, terrorists holding our hostages, that that strong a show of support for me is actually encouraging. 
So, I was not discouraged last night. I think it was a very strong show of support under the circumstances. And I think in order to take care of a very complex international and national series of crises that, coincidentally, are on us at the same time, and to maintain the commitment in our Nation to dealing with the Iranian situation as a crisis equal to what it was when the hostages were first taken, that it's better for me to stay here and not campaign during the primary season
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we've not really gone it alone up until this point. We've had two unanimous votes in the U.N. Security Council to condemn the Iranian action and to encourage them to release the hostages. We had a vote in the Security Council to impose very rigid sanctions against Iran, and the vote was unanimous except that the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia cast negative votes, which has the effect of a veto. 
But during that period of time, we had the support of our allies and their willingness to impose the sanctions if we chose. We've gone through phases of trying to negotiate the release of our hostages peacefully and without any confrontation with the Iranian officials. Even as short as a few weeks ago, the. Revolutionary Council, the President of Iran, the Foreign Minister of Iran, even the terrorists who are holding our hostages, announced that they would be transferred from the control of the hostages [terrorists] 2 to the Government. And we made this announcement to the American people following a public address by the President of Iran, Bani-Sadr, to that effect. 
Subsequently, two members of the Revolutionary Council reversed their positions, and unanimity no longer prevailed, and the Ayatollah Khomeini made a decision that they would not be released. But we've gone through these phases, and I think that our allies have been patient along with us. 
Recently, I have specifically asked the allies to go ahead and takeaction of a diplomatic and an economic nature, to be defined by them, to encourage the Iranian Government officials to work toward the release of the hostages and their return to freedom, so that we could end this crisis and protect the hostages as well. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, the last economic actions that we took—to stop all transactions with Iran and the visiting back and forth from Iran, and the preceding actions that we took shortly before that—to break diplomatic relations with Iran, and to impose restraints on visas, and also to impose economic sanctions officially and to, in effect, set aside $8 billion or more of their money for future claims by private citizens, the Government, or corporations in our Nation-all were very serious matters and actions. And that's one thing that we'd like to see impress itself upon the Iranian Government officials. The other, of course, is our being joined by our allies. And the realization in Iran that they are becoming increasingly isolated, at least from the Western World, I hope will have a sobering effect on them. 
We have to reserve the option to take other action if we deem necessary. And I don't think it would be appropriate for me to go any further than to refer back to the November 20 statement that described the options that we have, including—I think the phrase was "interruption of commerce." 
But we are an aggrieved party, and it's important that the American people not forget that militant terrorists, with the permission and encouragement of the official Government of Iran, are holding captive innocent American citizens in violation of every international law, diplomatic processes, and human decency. It's a crime, and to me it's just as much a crisis now as it was the first week the hostages were captured. 
THE PRESIDENT. That's a judgment the President will have to make. And I've been faced with that question every day, and I've tried to make the best judgment I could under the changing circumstances about how to protect the integrity and the honor and the interest of our Nation and, combined with that, the lives and safety of the hostages and work toward the hostages' release. 
I don't think that we've violated the honor of our Nation; I don't think we've violated ourcommitment to protect the lives and safety of the hostages. We have not been successful, obviously, in securing their release, but I can't give you a time schedule. I think that would be inappropriate. If I had a time schedule worked out in my mind, I don't think it would be good to reveal it. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, obviously a change in the status of our hostages, either a partial release to control of the Government itself or any sort of punitive action against our hostages, have been two factors that I've had to consider from the beginning. I think the second of those was described in the November 20 statement, which we drafted very carefully. Every now and then I have to go back and remind myself of the original threats: that the hostages would be tried as spies and would be executed, and later, that our Nation would be tried as a criminal nation. And we've issued very stern warnings about that. 
Lately there have been some stirrings of political fragmentation in Iran, with the riots on the campuses and so forth. And there have also been some disturbing statements made by the terrorists; for instance, if Iraq invades Iran this would be a puppet of the United States, and the hostages would be executed. They've made those statements just within the last few days, and there was not any immediate counterstatement made by either Khomeini or the Government officials. 
Earlier in the captivity, whenever the terrorists said anything about physical abuse or threats of death against the hostages, either Khomeini himself or some other person would almost automatically say, "We do not intend to have any physical harm to the hostages." 
So, it's a very complicated and very sensitive subject and one that we've tried to keep before the consciousness of the American people in an accurate and not misleading way. But I cannot foreclose any options available to our country, and I think that I've described it as best I can to you
So, I get along well and don't get excited or disturbed about things, except when I'm thinking deeply about what to do concerning Iran, or what action to take to control inflation, or how to deal with the combination of inflation and high interest rates, and Iran and Afghanistan and energy and running an election campaign, and I get quiet or walk off by myself-my wife knows that I'm kind of studying about—I didn't mean to belabor the answer. But we have a good, solid family life, which really helps me a lot, and adequate time for recreation and exercise and to be with my family



Address to the Nation on the Rescue Attempt for American Hostages in Iran
April 25, 1980

Late yesterday, I cancelled a carefully planned operation which was underway in Iran to position our rescue team for later withdrawal of American hostages, who have been held captive there since November 4. Equipment failure in the rescue helicopters made it necessary to end the mission. 
As our team was withdrawing, after my order to do so, two of our American aircraft collided on the ground following a refueling operation in a remote desert location in Iran. Other information about this rescue mission will be made available to the American people when it is appropriate to do so. 
There was no fighting; there was no combat. But to my deep regret, eight of the crewmen of the two aircraft which collided were killed, and several other Americans were hurt in the accident. Our people were immediately airlifted from Iran. Those who were injured have gotten medical treatment, and all of them are expected to recover. 
No knowledge of this operation by any Iranian officials or authorities was evident to us until several hours after all Americans were withdrawn from Iran. 
The mission on which they were embarked was a humanitarian mission. It was not directed against Iran; it was not directed against the people of Iran. It was not undertaken with any feeling of hostility toward Iran or its people. It has caused no Iranian casualties. 
Planning for this rescue effort began shortly after our Embassy was seized, but for a number of reasons, I waited until now to put those rescue plans into effect. To be feasible, this complex operation had to be the product of intensive planning and intensive training and repeated rehearsal. However, a resolution of this crisis through negotiations and with voluntary action on the part of the Iranian officials was obviously then, has been, and will be preferable. 
This rescue attempt had to await my judgment that the Iranian authorities could not or would not resolve this crisis on their own initiative. With the steady unraveling of authority in Iran and the mounting dangers that were posed to the safety of the hostages themselves and the growing realization that their early release was highly unlikely, I made a decision to commence the rescue operations plans. 
This attempt became a necessity and a duty. The readiness of our team to undertake the rescue made it completely practicable. Accordingly, I made the decision to set our long-developed plans into operation. I ordered this rescue mission prepared in order to safeguard American lives, to protect America's national interests, and to reduce the tensions in the world that have been caused among many nations as this crisis has continued. 
In the aftermath of the attempt, we continue to hold the Government of Iran responsible for the safety and for the early release of the American hostages, who have been held so long. The United States remains determined to bring about their safe release at the earliest date possible. 
As President, I know that our entire Nation feels the deep gratitude I feel for the brave men who were prepared to rescue their fellow Americans from captivity. And as President, I also know that the Nation shares not only my disappointment that the rescue effort could not be mounted, because of mechanical difficulties, but also my determination to persevere and to bring all of our hostages home to freedom. 
We have been disappointed before. We will not give up in our efforts. Throughout this extraordinarily difficult period, we have pursued and will continue to pursue every possible avenue to secure the release of the hostages. In these efforts, the support of the American people and of our friends throughout the world has been a most crucial element. That support of other nations is even more important now. 
We will seek to continue, along with other nations and with the officials of Iran, a prompt resolution of the crisis without any loss of life and through peaceful and diplomatic means


San Antonio, Texas Remarks and an Informal Exchange With Reporters Alter Visiting the Five Men Injured During the Rescue Attempt for American Hostages in Iran. 
April 28, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I just had the high privilege and honor of visiting five brave men—Americans who were willing to offer their lives for the freedom of their fellow Americans who are being held hostage in Iran: Airman Bill Tootle, Staff Sergeant Joseph Beyers, Lieutenant Jeffrey Harrison, Major Leslie Petty, Major James Schafer

I am overwhelmed with emotion when I look at and speak to these men. And I'm filled with a sense of abhorrence and horror at the actions of Iranian officials in recent days, who violated all principles of humanity and decency by exhibiting the bodies of the fellow warriors of these brave men in Iran. They did not and could not bring dishonor on those who fell in the performance of their duty. They only brought dishonor on themselves, and they indicated by this inhumane act of displaying these bodies the kind of people with whom we have been dealing to try to secure the freedom of our fellow Americans

THE PRESIDENT. I can't say



Energy Conservation in Transportation Remarks at a White House Briefing. 
April 29, 1980

The disappointing events in Iran have been of great concern to our Nation, and I know they must encompass a large part of your consciousness and your thoughts during these troubling days. As President and Commander in Chief, I have been very proud lately of the strength of our Nation, the unity of our country, the commitment of our people, the heroism of our warriors who offered their lives for the concept of freedom and for the freedom of our American hostages. 
This evening I have a press conference, and I'll discuss these and other issues of importance to our country at that time. But I would like to say that I am absolutely sure that I made theright choice in sending the rescue mission into Iran, and the men who went have expressed their personal thanks to me for giving them this opportunity to serve their country. 
This afternoon, because of the importance of our subject, I want to move directly into it. It concerns you and every human being who lives in this country. And we must not forget that the recent events in Afghanistan and Iran and the Middle East, our relationship with our allies around the world, economic problems which are faced by our Nation and others, are all directly related to the subject which we will discuss this afternoon.



The President's News Conference
April 29, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. Before answering questions this evening, I would like to say a few words about the rescue mission in Iran. 
Our goal in Iran is not to conquer; neither was theirs. Their goal was not to destroy nor to injure anyone. As they left Iran, following an unpredictable accident during the withdrawal stage, with eight of their fellow warriors dead, they carefully released, without harm, 44 Iranians who had passed by the site and who were detained to protect the integrity of the mission. 
This is in sharp comparison to the ghoulish action of the terrorists and some of the Government officials in Iran, in our Embassy this weekend, who displayed in a horrible exhibition of inhumanity the bodies of our courageous Americans. This has aroused the disgust and contempt of the rest of the world and indicates quite clearly the kinds of people with whom we have been dealing in a peaceful effort to secure a resolution of this crisis. They did not bring shame and dishonor on those fallen Americans; they brought shame and dishonor on themselves. 
We will continue to try for a peaceful solution. As we see the consequences of the actions that we've already taken, economic and diplomatic actions continue to punish Iran, a nation that is suffering from economic deprivation and from political fragmentation because they persist in this inhuman act. 
We will not forget our hostages, and we will continue to take whatever stepsarenecessary and feasible to secure their safe release and their return to their homes and to freedom.
I'd be glad to answer questions. 
We devoted those months of our hostages' incarceration to repeated and varied diplomatic efforts directly and through intermediaries, through the United Nations, through our friends and others. We were promised repeatedly by Iranian officials, by the President, the Prime Ministers, Foreign Minister, by a unanimous vote of the Revolutionary Council, even by the terrorists themselves, that the hostages would indeed be released by the terrorists and turned over to control of the Government, at which time further steps could be taken to secure their complete release and their return home. 
Beginning back in November when the hostages were first taken; we began preparations for a rescue mission which would have had to be undertaken had the hostages been injured in any way. At the time we began final plans for this particular rescue mission, we had concluded repeated exercises and training of both men and equipment and technique and procedure and had honed it down to a fine operation, which everyone believed had a good chance for success. 
Had we waited later, it would have been much [more] difficult to conclude the mission successfully, because of the increasingly short nights and because of the prevailing winds being likely to change, making strong headwinds against our planes and helicopters, and because the temperature of the air made it much more difficult to lift large loads required in this long and very complicated process. 
So, we exhausted every peaceful procedure; we waited until the proper moment; we could not logically have waited much longer. And I think the decision was made properly. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think the mission had to be planned with an optimum number of both men and with the equipment they required in order to ensure secrecy, incisiveness, staying on a very rigid schedule, accommodating unforeseen circumstances. And at the time the mission was terminated, we did it with great regret. There had been a prior understanding among all of us involved in the detailed planning that if we got below six functioning helicopters, the mission to actually go in for the rescue attempt would have been very doubtful of success and ill-conceived. The recommendation came back from the refueling operation in the desert area that since they were down to only five helicopters, that the mission should not be undertaken—the actual rescue attempt. The commanding officer of the entire operation agreed, made this recommendation to me, and I agreed myself. 
The people who were on the ground in charge of the rescue team were extremely eager, courageous, dedicated, and determined to succeed. When they recommended that it not be done, that was a major factor in my decision. But I made the final decision. 
THE PRESIDENT. It's important for American people and for all the world to realize the tremendous restraint that we have demonstrated. We have tried every possible and feasible effort to resolve this crisis by humanitarian and peaceful means. We are still continuing those efforts. 
The fact is, though, that a horrible crime, as measured by international law, by diplomatic custom, and against humanity itself, is being perpetrated at this very minute. The 53 hostages being held are not guilty of any crime. The crime is being committed by terrorists who are kidnaping innocent victims, sponsored by and approved by Government officials themselves. In two votes in the Security Council of the United Nations, unanimous votes, Iran was condemned for this action. And in the International Court of Justice, that decision was confirmed. 
We have nothing against the Iranian people, and we still want to see this issue resolved successfully and peacefully. But there is no guilt that I feel on behalf of our Nation for what occurs in Iran. 
We were very careful on this particular operation to cause no harm or injury or death to any Iranians. It is a very troubling thing for me that Americans, because of an accident, did lose their lives and were injured. They were not met by any Iranian forces. No Iranian officials discovered the presence of the American rescue team until several hours after the last one had left Iranian soil. 
So, we want this issue to be settled, but we cannot deal with inhumane people who have no respect for international law, who violate the tenets of their own religion, and who persecute innocent people who are American citizens and deprive them of their freedom for 6 months. There is no equality about it at all. 
We are eager to see this issue resolved, but Iran is the nation which is committing a crime. We have tried to settle this in accordance with international law and peacefully, and we will continue to do so. 
THE PRESIDENT. The man who supervised the desecration of the bodies was a member of the Revolutionary Council. I think it is accurate to say that other members of the Iranian Government did publicly condemn this abhorrent act and have now promised to deliver the American bodies to intermediaries, to be delivered, ultimately, back to our country. We hope that this commitment will be kept, and I pray that it will. 
But the fact that the terrorists participated in the desecration is an indication of the kind of people they are and a vivid indication of the difficulties that we have experienced in getting what seems to be required—a unanimous decision by terrorists, the top officials, the Revolutionary Council, and the Ayatollah Khomeini-before this crime can be terminated.
Judy [Judy Woodruff, NBC News]. 
THE PRESIDENT. It would be inadvisable for me to describe the operation beyond the point that actually did occur. We had intended to place the rescue team in an isolated region within a proper distance of Tehran. And then if everything was satisfactory, if they were undetected, if there was no apparent change in the circumstances within the compound itself, if the weather conditions warranted and equipment was in a satisfactory condition, only then were we to undertake the actual rescue operation. 
There's a general consensus, with which I think no one disagrees, that the actual rescue operation would have been the easiest of the three phases; the most difficult, the intrusion into Iran and the placement of those forces; and the second most difficult, the actual extraction of our hostages and men from Iran after the rescue itself from the compound. 
But the details of what would have been undertaken is something that I would prefer not to comment on since it did not occur. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think it would be better to ask him about the specifics. I think I can say accurately that Secretary Vance preferred that we not take any kind of action inside Iran that might have had any connotation of a military nature. His preference was to wait longer instead of mounting the rescue operation. But I made the decision based on the overwhelming recommendation and concurrence with other advisers. I have no doubt at all in my mind that it was theright decision. 
Had the operation been successful or even had it been concluded without complete success, it would have ended a continuing crisis that is destabilizing for the people of Iran, that's causing them immense political and economic suffering at this very moment, and it would have made unnecessary the upcoming economic pressures on Iran, which will be much more severe when our major allies impose those same kinds of economic sanctions on Iran the middle of next month. It would also have meant that we could have begun restoring Iran as an accepted nation in the world structure and remove the reasons for condemnation of them. 
So, in my opinion the operation had a very good chance of success, and it would have brought to a conclusion this unfortunate holding of our hostages and ended what is a very destabilizing political situation in that region of the world. 
THE PRESIDENT. Obviously an operation of this kind would have had some risk, but we were convinced that the hostages could be removed successfully and safely. 
THE PRESIDENT. In November, I think it was November the 20th, we were constantly hearing from the terrorists who held our hostages that they would be immediately tried for war crimes and executed. We spelled out to the public, and therefore to Iran, the extreme adverse consequences to them if such action should be taken, without being overly specific, but letting them know that there would be serious consequences for their nation and their people. We specifically spelled out one step in that process short of military action, and that was the interruption of commerce to Iran. 
Our Nation is firm in its resolve. It's remarkably united. Our people have been surprisingly patient. But I don't think there's any doubt among the leadership in Iran, in the Government or among the terrorists themselves, that it is to their advantage not to physically harm the hostages whom they hold. And I hope they will be convinced as time goes by—not much time, I pray—that the adverse consequences of the action that we have already taken, with diplomatic and political isolation and with economic sanctions, is fragmenting their own structure of government and dividing their own nation and preventing Iran from making the progress that was envisioned when they had the revolution itself. 
It's a remarkable commentary on this fragmentation that in spite of the deep commitment of their new constitution, the Ayatollah Khomeini, and their public officials, they have not even been able to hold an election in Iran after months of effort. 
So, I believe that being joined by our allies in similar kinds of economic sanctions might very well be a factor that would bring the Iranians to realize that it's much better for them to release the hostages unharmed and to resolve this crisis. 


White House Briefing for Civic and Community Leaders Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session. 
April 30, 1980

When we face each day here in Washington in the Government of the greatest nation on Earth, responsible for a multitude of issues, there is no way to separate one from another. Energy, inflation, interest rates, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the holding of our hostages in Iran, possible peace in the Middle East, dealing with the problems in Africa, moving forward with legislation on a broad basis, for budget matters both in defense as contrasted with and cooperative with domestic programs—they all fit in together in a common package

The Mideast, the Persian Gulf region provides about 90 percent of all the oil that's sold for export in the world. It's a 12,000-mile pipeline from there to here and from there to other countries on Earth. And when there is a disturbance in the Middle East, when there is a Palestinian problem in the Middle East not resolved, when there's enmity between Egypt and Israel or between Israel and her neighbors, or when there's an unstable Iran or an invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union, this aggravates our Nation's energy problems, because our security, both military and economic security, is predicated on an adequate supply of energy. There is no way to separate one from another

I'm determined that I will always keep before the American people, vividly in our minds and hearts, the plight of the American hostages. But we now have completed a rescue operation which was complicated and which was, unfortunately, not successful. We have now convinced our major allies around the world to join us in an effort to convince the Iranians that it's to their advantage to resolve this hostage crisis at the earliest possible moment


United States-Japan Agreement on Cooperation in Research and Development in Science and Technology Remarks of the President and Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira on Signing the Agreement. 
May 1, 1980

The people of my Nation deeply appreciate this common approach to very difficult problems and the resolve, which we share, to face international terrorism, exemplified in Iran, and aggression, exemplified in Afghanistan, with a mutuality of purpose, with a common commitment, and with national and individual courage. The bonds which bind together the people of Japan and the United States provide the very cornerstone of our policy in Asia, and they also provide the central core of the global policy of the United States of America


White House Briefing for Civic and Community Leaders Remarks During a Briefing on Energy and Inflation. 
May 6, 1980

I know that you realize the complexity of issues that confront us during these trying days, both in international matters and also in domestic affairs. There are times when international problems are combined with intense human feelings. This morning I met with the Florida delegation on the extremely difficult problem of Haitian and Cuban refugees seeking asylum in our country. And of course, the hostages being held in Iran are a constant concern to me almost every waking moment. How to resolve this serious problem for humanity and for international interrelationships is indeed a challenge which we have not yet been able to resolve. 
I could not help noticing with intense interest the difference in the responsibility assumed by the British Government in protecting the Embassy of Iran compared with the Iranian Government condoning the terrorist attack on our Embassy. And the maintenance of international norms and the maintenance of the standards of human decency are a prerequisite for the orderly progress of any nation, and in particular, Iran. 
Their Government is fragmented. They've not been able to implement the results of their so-called revolution. In spite of weeks of attempts, they've not even been able to complete the election for members of their Parliament. Their economy is deteriorating daily. They've been condemned by almost every nation on Earth. And all of it is based upon an inhumane act encouraged by, or at least condoned by, the Government itself. 
The prayers and the concerns of all Americans have been demonstrated in this last few months. And I believe that our Nation is remarkably united and uncharacteristically patient in trying to preserve the lives and the safety of our hostages; at the same time, to protect the principles on which our Nation was founded and which we still must preserve


Labor Council for Latin American Advancement Remarks at a White House Reception. 
May 8, 1980

The unwarranted example of international terrorism in Iran, when innocent Americans have been captured and held imprisoned now for 6 months, is a travesty and a violation of international law and human decency. We cannot rest until all those Americans are restored to freedom and can come home to be with their own families



Department of State Remarks at the Swearing In of Edmund S. Muskie as Secretary. 
May 8, 1980

This afternoon Warren Christopher and I were sitting in the Oval Office going over this day's events. We were talking about the Soviets and their 85,000 troops in Afghanistan. We were talking about the hostages in Iran. We were talking about the would-be assassins who are now hiding in the Libyan Embassy and what to do about them. We were talking about the flood of people who are coming here from Cuba and from Haiti seeking freedom and a better life. We were talking about the sensitive United Nations Security Council vote this afternoon that Don McHenry was trying to handle under difficult circumstances.


American Servicemen Killed in Iran Eulogy at the National Memorial Service
May 9, 1980

I speak for all Americans when I say to those who anonymously risk their lives each day to keep the peace and to maintain our military strength, and to the loved ones of those who died on the Iranian desert: Your risk, your suffering, your loss, are not in vain. I fervently pray that those who are still held hostage will be freed without more bloodshed, that all those who would use terror to impel innocent people will see the cruel futility of their criminal acts


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Address Before the World Affairs Council of Philadelphia. 
May 9, 1980

For the past 6 months, all of our policies abroad have been conducted in the glare of two crises: the holding of American hostages in Iran and the brutal invasion of Afghanistan by the Soviet Union. In meeting these crises our tactics must change with changing circumstances. But our goals will not change and have not wavered. 
We will not rest until our fellow Americans held captive in Iran—against every tenet of law and decency—are safe and home free.


In recent years it's become increasingly evident that the well-being of those vital regions and our own country depend on the peace, stability, and independence of the Middle East and the Persian Gulf area. Yet both the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the pervasive and progressive political disintegration of Iran put the security of that region in grave jeopardy

Soviet success in their invasion of Afghanistan, even at the high cost in blood and the high cost in respectability which Moscow is now paying, could turn Afghanistan from a roadblock against aggression into a launching pad for future incursions. This would threaten Pakistan and Iran, but not just those nations alone. Soviet aggression in Afghanistan, unless checked, confronts all the world with the most serious, long-term strategic challenge since the cold war began. To underestimate the magnitude of that challenge would constitute an historic error, an error with probably historic consequences

While we seek to attain our broad ultimate objectives, we must never lose sight of immediate human suffering. We've not forgotten and we will not forget the 53 Americans imprisoned in Iran. Our Nation places a great value on human life and on human freedom. We will continue to make every effort, using peaceful means if possible, and through collective action with our allies, to obtain the release of our countrymen. And we will remind the Iranian leaders that the integrity and the independence of their own country can only suffer from this policy of theirs that led to international isolation and also internal disintegration. We have no permanent quarrel with the Iranian people. We wish to fashion a relationship of dignity with them, once this illegal action has been put behind us. 
Our Nation has continued to act responsibly and in good faith toward both the people and the leaders of Iran. Our rescue attempt was a mission of mercy, not a military attack. No Iranian was killed or harmed in any way. Its only aim was to rescue innocent victims of terrorist exploitation. I regret only that it did not succeed and that eight gallant young men died in the accident as the rescue team was leaving its desert rendezvous


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting at Temple University. 
May 9, 1980

Lately we've been preoccupied with the unwarranted Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the inhuman holding of 53 Americans captive by international terrorists in Iran. We will never rest until our 53 hostages are free and at home where they belong and we can show them how much we love them.

As I said earlier, it is a serious mistake, a serious error to exaggerate or to emphasize differences that do exist on occasion between National Security and State and Defense and Treasury and Energy and myself, and maybe the Vice President as well. Always when we evolve policy I encourage my advisers to put forward their own ideas on the best solution to a serious problem. And once we decide on a basic solution and I make the final judgment on it, unanimously we have had support. The one exception is on the rescue attempt in Iran, when Secretary Vance expressed strong reservations about it. And after the decision was made he said to me, "I will support your decision until the rescue operation is completed. Following that I would like to resign as Secretary of State." I accepted his resignation on that basis. That was the reason for it.

I will continue the sanctions against Iran. Up until this time we have stood practically alone in the implementation of sanctions. A few other nations have joined us. Many have withdrawn their Ambassadors and their diplomatic staff from Iran in protest against what Iran has done. They were condemned unanimously by the United Nations Security Council on two occasions, and the International Court of Justice, the so-called World Court, also ruled that Iran had violated international law in a very serious manner. 
I don't have a specific date after which I will take advantage of the other options available to us. Military options are going to be kept for use if necessary. My preference has always been that we resolve this crisis in a peaceful fashion, and that's my hope and expectation in the future. 
On the 17th of this month our other major allies, Japan and the European countries and Canada, for instance, have decided to impose economic sanctions against Iran similar in nature, not quite so far reaching, as those that we have imposed ourselves. We'd like to convince Iran not only that they are hurting us by keeping innocent people kidnap victims, but also they are hurting themselves. 
When we began to study a possible rescue operation back in November of last year, it was obvious to us the difficulty that would be involved. It's a rare thing when helicopters of any kind have to fly 600 land miles, more than 500 nautical miles, nonstop. Ordinarily helicopters fly about 100 miles at the time. These helicopters were designed originally as minesweeping helicopters. They're very reliable. They operate over the water, as you can see, and they have a fairly extensive range. We only needed fix helicopters to go into Tehran and to help remove the hostages and the rescue team. But we had to have at least that many. So, from the U.S. carrier the Nimitz, we launched the eight helicopters, having two extra ones above and beyond what we anticipated needing. 
We had a very unpredictable and heartbreaking series of coincidences that caused the termination of this rescue attempt. We had an unanticipated, very severe sandstorm that turned one of the helicopters back to the Nimitz. That same sandstorm forced down two helicopters that had to stay on the ground and be left by the others for more than 30 minutes, and we had two helicopters that developed mechanical difficulties. 
It's impossible on a secret mission like this, where you had to go all the way across 500 miles of Iran without being detected and then stay overnight without being detected, to refuel without being detected, to take in the rescue team without being detected. It's a serious problem if you start trying to add extra planes or extra helicopters. 
We thought that two extra ones would be plenty. We never dreamed that we would have three helicopters go out of commission. We had practiced different elements of the rescue mission in this country, both in the North Carolina area and out in the desert, similar to Iran territory, more than 25 times, and this was a surprise to us, a heartbreaking surprise to us. I have no doubt that the mission would have been successful had it been able to go ahead, but we could not anticipate the sandstorms nor the breakdown in the helicopters. It was just one of those streaks of bad luck. And we could not have added twice as many helicopters, because the operation would have been much too complicated. You have to remember that every helicopter that went in had to have fuel brought in by C-130's in the middle of the night in a desert, not on an airport, and transferred. 
So, we wanted to keep the operation secret and simple and incisive. We were just plagued by bad luck. 
THE PRESIDENT. I wish now we had had another helicopter, but I didn't know ahead of time
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think it is accurate to say—and neither have I said—that the hostage situation in Iran is more manageable. With our hostages now moved to other countries [cities], 3 it's much more difficult for us to know where they are. However, we have presently achieved support from our allies which was not there before to help us exert common economic persuasion on Iran to resolve the hostage question. We've also clarified the issue, I believe, between ourselves and our allies, in mounting permanent economic and political pressure on the Soviet Union to convince them that they made a serious mistake in Afghanistan. Those crises are likely to continue on in the future

In my judgment the total complex list of the things with which I have to deal are more manageable, but it is not accurate to assume that we are any closer to getting our hostages back from Iran. It took an awful lot of my time and my advisers', as well, to plan and to mount the hostage rescue mission. I'm grieved that it did not succeed. I thought it was going to succeed. I am not at this time involved in that careful detailed planning leading up to an imminent rescue mission to repeat that one. 
We are keeping all our options open, and I believe that it's better for me now, because of the rapidly changing circumstances in our country, the fairly well defined relationship between our allies and the Soviet Union and Iran, and the accomplishment of some of our major goals on this legislative year and the completion of some of my extra duties in marshaling support for the Olympics boycott and for economic boycotts against the Soviet Union, that I can say in totality those burdens are more manageable, certainly manageable enough so that on occasion, once a week or so, I can go out for a day. And I think the balancing of benefit to be able to come here with you to answer questions and to try to put all these things into focus and to make a major foreign policy address in downtown Philadelphia today right after lunch more than makes up for my absence from Washington. 
When I made the commitment, by the way, to stay in the White House, I honestly thought we'd have the hostages out in a few weeks. I never dreamed that they would be held this long. So, it was time for me to make that move. I don't want to mislead anyone. I do not think that the hostage question is any more manageable than it was before



Secretary of State Muskie's Trip to Vienna Exchange With Reporters on the Secretary's Departure. 
May 13, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. That's one of the issues that Secretary Muskie will be discussing with the allies. They have announced publicly and informed us directly that they will carry out the sanction commitments against Iran, pending some major breakthrough in the release of the hostages, and we expect our allies to keep their commitments to us

THE PRESIDENT. Obviously, the more united the allies are in having a commitment to have the hostages released, the better off it is for us and for the hostages and for the future of Iran. It's important that the world know that those nations in the United Nations Security Council who voted for the sanctions if the hostages should not be released, would carry out their commitment, and they've reconfirmed that to us.


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Editors and Broadcasters. 
May 13, 1980

We've made good progress, I believe, in international affairs. In retrospect, our overestimation of the Soviets' willingness to accept a drastic cut in nuclear weapons; probably misjudged their inclinations-and it delayed to some degree the SALT II negotiations. Opening up China to friendship, I think, was a very notable achievement, and we've kept our friendship, as you know, at the same time with Taiwan. In dealing with the Iranian hostage question, I don't know how we could've done much differently from what we have done. We were on the verge of success several times


Carter/Mondale Presidential Committee Remarks at the National Campaign Headquarters. 
May 19, 1980

We've faced some difficult challenges in the last 6 months. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, strengthening our alliance, marshaling support for our position that an invasion of an innocent country can't go unpunished. We've had to deal with the shocking violation of every international principle and law by the Iranians, who have captured and held innocent hostages imprisoned. We've had to deal with these issues with sensitivity and with courage, with commitment, with openness, with frankness, and the American people have been remarkably united and they've been remarkably patient when patience was necessary. And our country has also been very strong in its commitment to unchanging principles


United States Foreign Assistance Remarks at a White House Briefing for Members of Congress. 
May 19, 1980

Our allies and trading partners whom we are calling upon to support our position with Iran and Afghanistan and other very sensitive matters feel that the United States has welched on its commitment


Asian/Pacific American Democratic Caucus Remarks at the First Annual Dinner. 
May 22, 1980

Economically we are facing serious challenges. We are facing the challenge of international terrorism, condoned and supported by the Government of Iran, against 53 Americans. We are facing the challenge of aggression, with the Soviets having marshaled 110,000 heavily armed troops to stamp out freedom in the nation of Afghanistan. We are facing the challenge of uniting, not only in our own country but among our allies, to face these difficulties together. I feel confident about the outcome, because our future is based on strength, economic strength

In the world today, there are probably 3 million refugees, 8 or 9 hundred thousand refugees who've escaped from Afghanistan, most into Pakistan, some into Iran. Hundreds of thousands of refugees have escaped from the Ethiopian area into Somalia and into other countries that border on Ethiopia. There's a potential flood of refugees trying to escape from the Castro regime in Cuba, hundreds of thousands of refugees escaping from the domination by the Vietnamese, the people in Kampuchea.


Nimitz Battle Group in the Indian Ocean Remarks on Board the U.S.S. Nimitz on the Battle Group's Return to the United States. 
May 26, 1980

Two weeks ago in the National Cemetery in Arlington, I offered my tribute on behalf of a nation to eight brave men who gave their lives in a lonely desert in Iran in the highest possible service that one human being can offer to another. They laid down their lives in a courageous way to save the lives of 50 hostages who have been held in an inhumane and unconscionable way by the Iranians, supported by their government, now for more than 6 months.

I would like now in closing my own remarks to introduce to you the wife of one of the hostages being held in Iran, Mrs. Louisa Kennedy, who will express to you the sentiments of the hostages' families for what you have meant to them personally as well as to our Nation


Norfolk, Virginia Remarks to Families A waiting the Return of the Nimitz Battle Group. 
May 26, 1980

But in this particular instance when the Nimitz, the Texas, and the California were on station, the hearts of a grateful nation were with them. They were not only protecting the stability and the peace of a troubled region of the world, and therefore protecting our own stability and peace here in the continental United States, but their presence and the strength of our military forces represented by them was the best guarantee that the lives of the 53 American hostages in Iran would indeed be protected


White House Briefing for Community Leaders Remarks at the Briefing. 
May 27, 1980

There is no way in this modern time and age in which we live to separate one consideration from another, because they are so intimately entwined; they're all so complex, complicated, rapidly changing, worldwide in nature. In every nation on Earth there has been felt in the last year and a half the impact of a 150-percent increase in the cost of oil in a period of 16 months. This means that on an annual average the price of oil has increased 10 percent per month. We've felt the impact of it, and we've seen how vulnerable we are to the instability brought about now as a threat by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the instability of the Government of Iran


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Newhouse Newspaper Editors. 
May 28, 1980

We have not yet been successful in getting the final stages of a Mideast peace agreement, and we have been disappointed in some respects because of the lack of adequate support for our position in opposing Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the Iran question from some of our allies

As you know, when the U.N. Security Council was voting on economic sanctions against Iran, the Soviet judge at that time had voted to condemn Iran's holding of the hostages and demanded they release them. The Soviet representative at the U.N. Security Council voted no, which vetoed the economic sanctions. I don't think there's any real, strong tie between a Soviet judge who's now independent of his own government's influence, ostensibly at least, on the International Court of Justice, and the Soviet Government's position


Columbus, Ohio Remarks at a Carter/Mondale Campaign Rally. 
May 29, 1980

Our Nation has acted with firmness and with determination against aggression in Afghanistan; against terrorism in Iran; against dangerous reliance on foreign oil; against inflationary government spending. And we've acted together as a nation also for peace here at home and in the Middle East; for human rights at home and abroad; for a strong defense; and for the dignity of our senior citizens, our minority groups, our young people, and for all working men and women


Remarks to Reporters on Signing the Message of Disapproval of the Public Debt Limit Extension Bill
June 5, 1980

In a primary campaign there's an excitement about it and an inclination to keep the contest going, to express displeasure about the inflation rate or about the unemployment rate or about Iran or about Afghanistan or about the transportation problems. Those things are ordinarily expressed, quite often expressed, by voters who cast their ballot against an incumbent


Interview With the President Excerpt From a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters on Board Air Force One. 
June 10, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, the ones who organized the forum were Bani-Sadr and Ghotzbadeh and their basic supporters. They have been in favor of resolving the hostage issue for a long time. The more militant groups and the mullahs who are involved in politics over there have been, in general, more reluctant to solve the hostage issue, and I don't think they endorsed or supported the convention called to condemn the United States. 
THE PRESIDENT. It always has been hard to set a time limit. We've tried, and it hasn't worked. So, I think to set another arbitrary time limit would be counterproductive. 
THE PRESIDENT. I would say the briefest time possible would suit me best. 
The other aspect of it is to enforce the economic sanctions that we've imposed against Iran, and the commerce and trade of travelers is a factor. We've worked hard to get other nations to join with us in that economic sanctions effort to induce the Iranians to release the hostages. And for American citizens to open up travel precedents that might grow in the future is in direct contravention to the order. 
And the third thing is when our own national security is at stake, which it is in the Iranian crisis, whether the visit by misguided Americans like Clark might exacerbate an already serious situation and cause further damages either to the hostages or to the Iranian relationships with the outside world is an additional factor. So, those are the bases on which the order was issued. 


Grand Island, Nebraska Exchange with Reporters on Arrival. 
June 10, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. It is both legal and constitutional to restrict travel to Iran for several reasons. The order was issued publicly and clearly, and my inclination is that it be carried out. We will make the ultimate decision on how to confront the people who violate the order—whether it should be a civil or criminal prosecution-but I think it is damaging to our Nation's foreign policy. It is damaging to carrying out the economic sanctions to Iran. It is clear that a prohibition legally should be followed


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session With Amigo Levi of La Stampa and Sergio Telmon of RAI-TV. 
June 12, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No, we have tried, in every way since the hostages were taken, to protect the lives and the safety of the hostages and also to protect the principles of our Nation and to secure the hostages' release. We've explored in every way, direct relationships with the Iranian Government officials and others. 
Now, I think the best avenue is through a multitude of diplomatic and economic efforts, being made through the United Nations and through other countries, to convince the Iranians that it is counterproductive for them to continue to hold these innocent people. This is an act of international terrorism, and it is condoned and supported by the official Government of Iran. And for other nations like Italy and the Europeans allies, Japan, and others, to join in with us to convince the Iranians that they are making a mistake and that the bringing of Iran back in to an acceptable position with other nations of the Earth, with an end to this act of terrorism, is very important. 
That's why we consider a peaceful approach to Iran, but with some economic sanctions being imposed to encourage them to act is important. In the meantime, we are pursuing every avenue-through religious leaders, through private citizens, through the United Nations, and through other governments—to induce Iran to release the hostages so that normal relationships can be restored. 
THE PRESIDENT. Military measures are not being considered. 
THE PRESIDENT. No


Interview With the President Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Representatives of the American Jewish Press Association. 
June 13, 1980

Yesterday I had press interviews with the media from both Italy and Yugoslavia to lay down the basic elements of our bilateral relationship with them. We are working hard to strengthen the support for our opposition of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and to strengthen our position on continuing economic sanctions against Iran until they release the hostages


Visit of King Hussein of Jordan Toasts at the State Dinner. 
June 17, 1980

We have had good discussions so far today—much better than would have been expected—because of his frankness and because of his generosity, his eagerness to understand different points of view without yielding at all on the deep principles which have guided his life and which he holds so dear. We have expressed our concern about aggression demonstrated by the Soviets' invasion of Afghanistan. We've expressed our concern about international terrorism, exhibited in Iran with the unwarranted holding of innocent Americans hostage for many months, and we've expressed ourcommitment to stability in the Persian Gulf region and to peace in the Middle East


The President's Trip to Europe Remarks on Departure From the White House. 
June 19, 1980

This is a trip that's fairly brief, but it's long in importance and long in difficulty and challenge. Our mission has many facets. We will examine such issues as energy dependence, the economics of emerging nations and of our own countries, a lasting peace for the Middle East. We'll discuss the clear-cut challenge of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the question of terrorism and how to deal with Iran, the control of nuclear arms. And we will also discuss, in individual meetings with the leaders of all of those nations, the differences and common purposes and commitments of our nations. But throughout all these interrelated issues and delicate shades of difference, we will be guided by this knowledge: the power of free, democratic nations, who welcome diversity and who do not erect walls to imprison our own people; who exist to nurture human rights and human beings, not to enslave them. The power of democracy and freedom will shape the future of the world.


Italy: State Dinner in Rome Toasts of the President and President Alessandro Pertini of Italy. 
June 20, 1980

As chief of state, he was foremost in his appeal to Iranian authorities—the first of all—to release our diplomatic personnel from terrorists, and it gives me great pleasure on this personal occasion to express the gratitude which the American people and I feel for his unswerving support


Italy: Visit to American Embassy Remarks to Embassy Employees and Members of the American Community in Rome. 
June 21, 1980

The military here are a constant reminder to me of what has happened in Iran and in other places around the world when diplomatic personnel, knowing that they were in danger, served their nation without flinching and without complaint and effectively. We are thankful that the good relationships that exist with Italy remove that kind of danger from your lives. But I know that every day of my own life I think constantly about the 53 innocent Americans who are the victims of international terrorism, supported by the Government of Iran, and we never forget them in our prayers and in our considerations for the future


Italy: Meeting With Pope John Paul II Exchange of Remarks. 
June 21, 1980

One thing more, and this is deeply important to me. On behalf of the American people, Your Holiness, I would like personally to thank you for your efforts toward the release of the 53 American hostages being held in Iran, victims of terrorism who are being held in continued defiance of international law and universally accepted standards of decency


Venice Economic Summit Conference Interview With Reporters Following the Conclusion of the Conference. 
June 23, 1980

We all see the international terrorism associated with the capture of the diplomats, of the Americans in Iran, as a pattern to be feared and condemned by the entire world. The essence of the hijacking and the terrorism, the capturing of diplomats, is that it's a phenomenon that's abhorrent to all of us and on which the nations represented here have stood resolutely. 
All of them have joined in with us in sanctions against Iran. Those sanctions are being maintained, and there's no doubt about that fact. In my private discussions with the leaders, we covered, in each case, what the countries are doing to help us, either through the United Nations or through diplomatic or other means. Some still have personnel in Iran who are giving assistance to us. 
So, that's a matter of great concern to all of us. There's no 
The Moslem nations, as you know, have formed a three-person committee to explore those possibilities. And it may be, if the Soviets are very discouraged about their lack of success in subjugating the Afghan people, that they might be looking for some way to resolve this issue, and they might attach themselves to this Moslem country effort. But I don't have any way to know. 
THE PRESIDENT. Iran, Syria, and-anybody know?


Yugoslavia: State Dinner in Belgrade Toast of the President. 
June 24, 1980

Mr. President, our talks today have also touched on the grave consequences of politically motivated terrorism. I speak for every American citizen when I say how much we appreciate Yugoslavia's forthright support for the release of the American diplomatic personnel who at this moment are held hostage in Iran, in violation of every tenet not only of international law but of simple decency


Spain: State Luncheon in Madrid Text of the President's Toast. 
June 25, 1980

Our two countries also share a strong interest in democratic evolution and respect for human rights in other parts of the world. In Latin America we both have special ties. I appreciate the support and wise counsel we have often received from Spain with respect to difficult, frequently critical situations in Latin America and the Caribbean. We also appreciate the close consultations we have had and the assistance you have given us on the hostage crisis in Iran and other aspects of that delicate situation. In the Middle East and parts of Africa, we can look forward to further cooperation, especially valuable because of your historical knowledge of the Moslem world


Spain: Visit to American Embassy Remarks to Embassy Employees and Members of the American Community in Madrid. 
June 26, 1980

Your life is not only a difficult and dedicated one but also, at times, dangerous. In the last 6 years, for instance, four American Ambassadors have been killed in the line of duty. And I can never look into the faces of anyone who serves in the Foreign Service without thinking about the 53 American hostages, who are innocent, who are held as a horrible act of international terrorism, condoned and supported by the official Government of Iran. 
This problem is constantly on my mind, and I never meet with a foreign leader or in a group of foreign leaders without very early raising this problem with them, urging them to do everything they possibly can, through diplomatic or private channels, to hasten the day when these 53 brave Americans will be free and will be back home where they belong


Portugal: State Luncheon in Lisbon Toast of the President. 
June 26, 1980

Many of you in this room have helped lay the foundations of a lasting democracy in Portugal. You, the democratic leaders, have personally borne the burdens of office. You've played the role of responsible opposition. You've organized, inspired, and led your people. Because of your personal involvement in creating democracy, you know better than most how precious it is. It's no wonder that Portugal was among the first of the world's nations to recognize and to respond to the threat which was posed to democratic societies everywhere by aggression in Afghanistan and official terrorism in Iran


The President's Trip to Europe Remarks on Arrival at Andrews Air Force Base, Md. 
June 26, 1980

And finally, all the nations expressed their commitment to us as rapidly as possible to encourage the Iranian Government to end the act of international terrorism which they have perpetrated against 53 innocent Americans, against our Nation, and against the rest of the world, indeed. This holding of innocent hostages is unacceptable. It violates every principle of international law and human decency. All the nations have committed themselves again to us that they would do everything in the world they could, through private, diplomatic channels and through their public statements and actions, to secure the rapid release of the American hostages


Oakland, California Remarks at a Reception for East Bay Area Community and Civic Leaders. 
July 3, 1980

Well, I feel good about this country; I feel good about the future. My prime responsibility is to keep our Nation at peace, at peace through strength—military strength, economic strength, political strength and, I pray God, moral and ethical strength based on principles that never change. That's not an easy thing to do in a time of world turmoil, and the close interrelationship among nations, and the violation of the international spirit brought about the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and the unwarranted and inhumane capture and holding of 53 innocent Americans in Iran. But all of us need to look to the future with determination, with a maximum degree of unity, and with confidence


Merced, California Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
July 4, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. John, if there's one subject that literally never leaves my mind, it's the 53 innocent Americans that have been held so long by the kidnapers and international terrorists in Iran, supported by and condoned by the Iranian Government. I have probably put more time and more prayer on that one subject than any other that I've faced as President. In the last few hours, as a matter of fact, I have been in touch with the State Department and with others that I can't name publicly in trying to have an avenue to the Iranian leaders to get our hostages released. As you know, we tried a rescue mission, which failed tragically; which, if it could have gone forward, would have been successful. We've tried diplomatic means. We've been to the world court. We've been to the United Nations. 
We've got two considerations in mind today that we've had since the very first day of this tragedy. One is to protect the lives and the safety of the hostages. And so far as we know, although they suffer from imprisonment, their lives and their safety have been protected. Secondly, we've upheld the principles of our Nation. There are some things that I could not do in order to secure the release of the hostages if it meant embarrassing our country or apologizing for something which we have not done or bringing our Nation to its knees to beg those terrorists to do what they ought to do under international law and in the realm of human compassion. 
I can't tell you when the hostages will be released. The problem has always been that there is no one in the Government of Iran who has either the courage or the leadership capability or the authority to make that decision. We're trying now to work with the President of Iran, Bani-Sadr, the Foreign Minister of Iran, Ghotzbadeh. We have very little access directly to Ayatollah Khomeini. We're working with the opposition mullahs who have opposed Bani-Sadr and Ghotzbadeh when they announced they would return the hostages. 
But we obviously are doing everything we can. I do not know what else we can do without endangering the lives of the hostages themselves. But every day, all day, by every possible means to reach the Iranian people, we are trying to induce them to release the hostages. 
The last thing I want to say is this: We are punishing Iran severely for holding the hostages. It's costing them literally millions of dollars every day in lost revenue, lost trade, a poorer quality of life for their people. Their Government is divided, they're in chaos politically, because they're holding these hostages. But they are fanatics, some of them; they're terrorists, some of them; they're irresponsible, a large number of them. 
And how to get the hostages home I've not yet discovered. But I hope that every American, every day, will remember those 53 hostages, remember them in our prayers. And I believe that they will be coming home safely. 
I would like just to add one other point, because it is the Fourth of July. It's not a sign of weakness that a great nation like ours has been so deeply concerned about this issue. Many countries in the world would forget about 53 people. They're not famous people; they're not great people, as far as their past accomplishments are concerned. They're just common, ordinary, good, dedicated, patriotic Americans. We have never forgotten them. And when 220 million Americans are deeply obsessed with the lives and safety of just 53 people for months, to me that's a sign of greatness


Miami, Florida Remarks to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. 
July 4, 1980

We are struggling against international terrorism in Iran. And it's good on an Independence Day celebration to remember 53 Americans who are not free. They are innocent. They are kidnap victims by terrorists who have the support of their own government. 
And because we're standing up against the Soviet Union, who have taken away the freedom of those who live in Afghanistan-and we'll continue that struggle-we're determined to prove to the Soviets that it does not pay to deprive freedom from people. Those freedom-fighters there have our admiration. They're struggling for national liberation. Over 800,000 of them have crossed the borders into Pakistan, another 100 or 200 thousand into Iran. If anyone on Earth understands what it means to lose that kind of freedom and the importance of struggling to restore it, it would be those in this room who are assembled here tonight.


Tokyo, Japan Interview With Japanese Reporters. 
July 10, 1980

Similarly, in the development of technology, science, research, development, education, dealing with the energy problem, meeting the challenges of Soviet aggression in Afghanistan, international terrorism exemplified by the holding of American hostages in Iran, the growth of the strength of the ASEAN group, which is a very encouraging development, the opening up of China, a vast country very important to us both, with new opportunities for trade and exchange of ideas and a common purpose, the sharing of strategic matters—all of these elements of the life of Americans is identical with the importance in the life of Japanese


Elmendorf Air Force Base, Alaska Exchange With Reporters on Departure From Anchorage. 
July 10, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I had the message on the helicopter, coming back a few minutes ago, from the national security adviser. The press reports were that a young man named Richard Queen, I believe, from Maine, has been announced as being released by the terrorists in Iran, because he was seriously ill and could not be adequately treated in Tehran. We don't yet have a confirmation of this report. If it is true and if the young man is well after adequate treatment, of course we'll be very thankful. 
Obviously, the proper thing for the terrorists to do is to release all of the hostages who are being held, because they are innocent and they deserve to be with their families as well as those who are too ill to be treated. So, until we get a firm report on whether the young man has been released, I think it would be inappropriate for me to comment any further. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, as I said, the humanitarian thing to do would be to release all the hostages immediately. They should have done this long ago. But I think it would be better for me not to comment on Mr. Queen, because we don't want to say anything that might interfere with his release


Hollywood, Florida Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraising Dinner. 
July 17, 1980

In Iran we've seen the grossest example of the violation of human rights, through international terrorism condoned and supported by the Government of that country. We have no quarrel with the people of Iran; we have no quarrel with the results of their revolution. We do not want to interfere in their internal affairs. In the future we would like to see a good working relationship in trade and commerce with them. We want to see an Iran that is united, secure, stable, and at peace' with its neighbors. That's our hope. 
But as long as 52 Americans, innocent Americans, are held against their will, I as President can never rest. And it's heartening to me to see 220 million people in this great Nation almost completely obsessed with the safety and the freedom of just 52 Americans, who are not rich, not famous, not wealthy, but who belong to us. That's an example, I think, of the greatness of our country


Carter / Mondale Presidential Campaign Remarks at a White House Reception for Delegates to the Democratic National Convention. 
July 19, 1980

Later this morning, I met a young man named Richard Queen, who spent about an hour with me and Rosalynn— [applause] . He spent about an hour with me and Rosalynn. I won't tell you the entire conversation. But his prime concern was not for himself, although he has been found to have multiple sclerosis; his prime concern was not to do or say anything other than what would contribute to the release of the 52 other Americans who have suffered now since last November from unwarranted imprisonment in Iran. 
He told about weeks of being locked up in what he called "the tomb," in a place in a basement with no light or fresh air. And he was finally moved at night, blindfolded, to another building. They had the windows sealed up, but there was a small crack between two bricks in the wall. And he talked about the intense excitement he had the first morning, when day broke, to see a little glimpse of sunlight between two bricks. And eventually he heard two little girls talking in the streets outside the compound as they went to school one day, and even heard, he said, some birds sing



Dallas, Texas Remarks at a Dallas County Democratic Committee Voter Registration Rally. 
July 21, 1980

And I would like to point out to you that with the exception of eight brave Americans who gave their lives in an accident in the desert of Iran, we have not had a single American life lost in combat since I've been President, and I pray God we'll keep it that way

And the same applies in Afghanistan, where the Soviet Union has invaded a small, relatively defenseless, deeply religious country that was no challenge to anyone. Nine hundred thousand freedom loving people have escaped Afghanistan into Pakistan and Iran. They're escaping from communism to freedom, not from freedom to communism


Dallas, Texas Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraiser. 
July 21, 1980

We have extended our hand of friendship to literally hundreds of millions of people around the Earth who, in the past, looked upon us as enemies or potential enemies. We've kept our Nation at peace. With the exception of eight servicemen who were lost in the desert in Iran, in an accident, on a humanitarian mission, we've not had a single American serviceman or woman killed since I've been privileged to serve in the White House. And I pray to God that I can go out of office with that same record intact


Carter/Mondale Presidential Campaign Remarks at a White House Reception for Delegates to the Democratic National Convention. 
July 25, 1980

And I don't want to forget to point out to you that we are a nation at peace. We're at peace because we are strong. And if we are going to maintain peace in the future, we've got to keep that strength of all kinds that I described to you a few minutes ago. We lost eight brave servicemen in the desert in Iran in an accident, on not a warlike but a humanitarian mission. And except for them, since I've been in this White House we have never had a single American soldier killed in combat. And I hope and pray that I'll go out of office at the end of my second term With that record still intact


The President's News Conference
August 4, 1980
On the other hand, we have substantial trade with Libya. Libya is one of our major oil suppliers, and its high-quality crude oil is important to our east coast refineries. Libya has publicly and privately opposed Iran's seizure and holding of our hostages, and for a time, Libya joined with other Moslem countries in opposing the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan

I am not aware of any effort by Billy to affect this Government's policies or actions concerning Libya. I am certain that he made no such effort with me. The only. occasion on which Billy was involved, to my knowledge, in any matter between Libya and the United States was his participation, with my full approval, in our efforts to seek Libyan help for the return of our hostages from Iran. Let me discuss this incident briefly. 
On November the 4th, 1979, our hostages were seized in Tehran. In the weeks that followed, we explored every possible avenue to bring about their release. We increased our military presence in the Persian Gulf, we stopped all oil imports from Iran, and we seized the assets of that country. We appealed to the United Nations Security Council and to the World Court. We asked other governments, and particularly Moslem governments, including Libya, to support our position. As is still the case, we explored every official and unofficial avenue of contact we could find to encourage the Iranians to release the American hostages. 
Public statements coming out of Libya at that time were not supportive and indicated that our diplomatic efforts to secure their assistance had not been successful. During the third week in November, it occurred to us that Billy might be able to get the Libyans to help to induce the Iranians to release the American hostages. As requested, he talked to the Libyans about our hostages and arranged a meeting with a Libyan diplomat at the White House. I did not attend that meeting, and so far as I'm aware, Billy played no further role in these discussions with the Libyans. 
I made this decision in good faith, with the best interests of the hostages and our Nation in mind. Billy merely responded to our request for assistance, and I believe his only motive in this effort was to seek release of the American hostages from Iran. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, not in that particular instance concerning the hostages. We were using trained diplomats. Immediately after the hostages were seized, this became an absolute, total obsession of mine, to get those hostages released. We inventoried every possibility of influence on the Iranians to induce them to release our hostages, safely and immediately. We sent messages—and had our diplomats in those countries and contacted their diplomats in Washington—to almost every nation on Earth, every one that we thought might have the slightest semblance of influence with Iran. We especially thought that the Moslem countries, believing in the Koran, having the same religion as the Ayatollah Khomeini, might have a special influence. 
We had tried through diplomatic means to get Libya to give us some support in condemning the Iranian action and calling for the release of the hostages. Up through the 18th of November, the public statements coming out of Libya-and these are documented in Dr. Brzezinski's report had been negative, against our position, in effect supporting the holding of the hostages. Some private comments from Libyan diplomats to our diplomats in the United Nations, for instance, had said, "We would like to help you," but the public comments, which were the important ones, were contrary to that. 
That was the same day that the religious fanatics attacked the mosque in Saudi Arabia. It was the same day, I believe, that Khomeini announced that the hostages, American hostages, would be tried and, if convicted, Khomeini said, "Jimmy Carter knows what's going to happen to them." We thought that the hostages' lives were directly in danger
I think I tried to point out, as best I could remember, a couple of things that were happening at that time—the threat by Khomeini that the hostages might be killed and the fact that the Grand Mosque in Jidda was—in Mecca, I think was attacked by radical believers in the Moslem faith. Those were the kind of things that were causing me great concern. 
The approach to Libya, although now it has taken on great significance, here, 9 or 10 months later, was one of a broad pattern of things that I was doing, the National Security Council was doing, everyone in the State Department assigned to this task was doing, and many private citizens were doing. And there was nothing extraordinary about it. It was just one of a broad gamut of things that we were attempting to do in every possible way to get word to Khomeini that it was better for Iran to release those hostages.


Remarks Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the 1980 Democratic National Convention in New York
August 14, 1980

And I have learned that the Presidency is a place of compassion. My own heart is burdened for the troubled Americans. The poor and the jobless and the afflicted-they've become part of me. My thoughts and my prayers for our hostages in Iran are as though they were my own sons and daughters


Boston, Massachusetts Remarks at the Annual Convention of the American Legion. 
August 21, 1980

I've known America's courage by seeing it tested. I've seen it in the men who went to Iran to attempt so valiantly in an isolated desert to rescue their fellow Americans who are still held hostage there. I saw it in the families of the men who died in that effort, and I've seen it in the families with whom I've met as frequently as possible of the citizens who are still held captive in Iran. What a nation we are to produce such men and women. All Americans are thankful to them


Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Interview With Correspondents of WPIV-TV. 
September 3, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I don't have much good to report about the immediate prospects for release of our hostages. It's a problem that's always with me as President. As I said in my acceptance speech in New York, it's as though those hostages were members of my own family, my own sons and daughters. 
We stay in close touch with the families of the hostages, and we have a constant effort ongoing, some through public means, some through private diplomatic channels, some through emissaries who are not part of government, to try to induce the Iranians to release those hostages as something that's humane in nature but also something that would remove a tremendous burden politically, economically, and financially from Iran itself. There is a serious problem in Iran brought about to a major degree because those hostages are being held. 
In the past there has been no government with whom we could deal. Last week their Prime Minister was finally chosen. He's not yet been approved by their parliament. The parliament has now been elected, a speaker has been chosen, and a President has been chosen. So, we finally have, just in the last few days, a government in Iran that's still in the formative stages, and this week Secretary Muskie sent to the new Prime Minister an outline of our hopes that the hostages would be released and the circumstances under which we would cooperate with Iran after that had been accomplished.


Agricultural Commodity Credit Guarantees to Poland Remarks Announcing Approval of the Commodity Credit Corporation Guarantees. 
September 12, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, we've observed carefully what has been said in Iran, both today and in the days during the past week. We've learned to be very cautious about statements from Iran, but we'll be monitoring what is going on and analyzing the statement further


American Hostages in Iran Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
September 13, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think it's better not to get involved, in the political campaign, with the Iranian situation


Corpus Christi, Texas Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
September 15, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. From the very beginning, when the hostages were taken, we've had two commitments, Maria, that have been constantly on my mind and on my heart: first of all, is to protect the honor of our country and the integrity of our Nation and to let other nations join in with us in convincing Iran that they were making a serious mistake for themselves in holding these innocent Americans captive. That's the first point. The second point is, then, not do anything as a President that would endanger the safety or the lives of the hostages themselves. And we've been very careful in both these elements. 
The problem has been, in Iran, that there has been no government there with whom we could talk or negotiate or who could act. The terrorists, the militants, the students, whatever you want to call them, have been the ones making the decisions. Now, finally, there is an elected congress-or Majles, they call it—in Iran. There is finally, just chosen last week, a Prime Minister. There's a speaker of the house, and there's a President. So, they are making statements in Iran that might very well lead to a resolution of this problem in the future. 
The last thing that any political candidate ought to do, including an incumbent President, is to get into a negotiation with the Iranian authorities through public statements or through the news media. So, this is constantly on my mind. We're maintaining our position. We'll do everything to get our hostages home safe and to protect our own Nation's integrity and honor and, at the same time, not do anything that would endanger the independence and freedom, as a nation, of Iran. But I think it would be a serious mistake for me to make specific public statements about what I accept or do notaccept; it's just not a good way to negotiate with a government, through the public news media. Thank you very much


Atlanta, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
September 16, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I think Ed Muskie described it accurately. We don't have any reason to believe that the situation has been resolved at all. But there is at least a government now in Iran, and they haven't had anyone so far that could speak with authority. But now that they have in Iran a Majles, or a parliament, and a President and a Prime Minister and a speaker, at least there is an entity there with whom we might be able to work out the differences. But we don't have any prospect at this time for an early resolution of the issue. 
THE PRESIDENT. No, but I'm not surprised that there was a repetition


The President's News Conference
September 18, 1980

We've also been concentrating on the slow, difficult, diplomatic effort to free our hostages in Iran

THE PRESIDENT. I've not changed my position on the prospects for the hostages release. I do not predict an early resolution of the issue, because it's not in my hands, unilaterally. It has to be done through very careful negotiations with the Iranians and quite often because of unilateral decisions to be made by them. 
One of the major obstacles to progress in the past has been the absence of any viable government in Iran. Only in recent weeks, in fact in some instances in the last few days, have they had a parliament or a speaker of the parliament who could speak for them, or a Prime Minister. They have had a President for a long time. The President himself, Bani-Sadr, has been consistently in favor of the hostages being released. Now that their government is intact and now that the Ayatollah Khomeini has made a public statement for the first time outlining to some degree the demands to be pursued by Iran, obviously the situation has improved. 
Our position has been consistent. We have two goals in mind that have not changed since the first day the hostages were taken. One is to preserve the honor and integrity of our Nation and to protect its interests. That's never changed. And the second goal has also never changed, and that is not to do anything here in this country that would endanger the lives or safety of the hostages nor interfere with their earliest possible release back to freedom. 
This is an issue that's been constantly on my mind and on the minds of the American people. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. The United States is not going to apologize. 
We have long said that there would be a legitimate forum provided for the Iranians, who consider themselves to be aggrieved in many ways, to present their case. We encouraged the United Nations mission to go to Iran, to investigate the situation there, to have hearings in Iran, and to let there be a public exploration of Iran's claims or complaints. At the time we filed our suit in the World Court in the Hague we also invited Iran to participate with us, not in a combative way, but in a friendly way, to give them that forum, which would have been well covered by the world press, to express their concerns or their complaints about us or others in the past. So, this is not a new development at all. Our position has been very consistent. 
I cannot predict what will happen in the near future, but we are pursuing every possible legitimate avenue, as we have for many months, to reach some agreement with Iran, with those two constraints that I described to you concerning our Nation's honor and the safety of the hostages, to relieve this problem between us, which is obviously damaging to the United States and also very damaging to the people of Iran


Los Angeles, California Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
September 22, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I've been getting reports in from NSC and the State Department in the trip from Illinois here. We've been monitoring the situation very closely. The reports are that Iraq has made several attacks on Iran, by air primarily. We don't know the extent of the ground force engagement. 
Our only hope is that the two nations can resolve the disputes between them peacefully. We'll do everything we can to contribute to that peaceful resolution. We're not taking a position in support of either Iran or Iraq except just to encourage them, through the United Nations and through other means, to end the conflict and to minimize any bloodshed that might occur. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, I've always been concerned about the hostages, but not because of this


Torrance, California Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting
September 22, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I've been monitoring all day from Air Force One, with messages and telephone calls, the developments in Iraq and Iran along their border. Apparently, Iraq has decided to mount air strikes against several places in Iran and has done some damage, the extent of which we don't yet know. I'm also not familiar yet with accurate reports about the degree of ground force involvement. 
I don't believe that this altercation between Iraq and Iran will have any predictable effect on the lives or safety of the hostages. It could cut both ways. It could convince Iran that they need peace with their neighbors, they need to be part of the international community, they need to be able to have a strong and viable economy, they need to get spare parts for their military weapons, and so forth, and therefore induce them to release the hostages. I'm not predicting that, but it's a possibility. 
The most important thing in Iran is that they finally have a government. They finally have a President, a Prime Minister. They finally have a cabinet. They have a speaker of the Majles, and they have a parliament. This has not been the case in the past. I can't predict to you a rapid movement toward release of our hostages. I pray that it will happen. I cannot predict that it will yet. But I can tell you that the signals coming out of Iran lately-and they've all been public signals—have indicated some new desire on the part of the Iranians to resolve the problems between ourselves and them. 
We have a very restrictive policy now between ourselves and Iran. We are notpermitting any Iranians to come here from that country to the United States. There were some Iranian refugees who had already left their country and moved to different places in Europe, to Austria or to England or a few other countries, that we do permit to come in here, only on a very serious hardship case. I won't belabor the point, but just let me make one example. There are some fervent religious believers, for instance Jews, who were persecuted in Iran under the revolution, who escaped from Iran to Europe with the idea of coming here to join their relatives. A person like that is given a hardship permit to come into our country, and those are the only ones now that we are permitting to come here from Iran. 
I hope we'll get the hostages back safe. We've had two policies ever since this happened. One is to protect the honor and integrity and the best interests of our country. The other one is not to do anything to endanger the lives or safety or the hope for freedom of the hostages themselves. That's our unchanging policy, and I'm committed to that. And I believe that we will see the hostages come back to freedom in the future; I can't say when



Los Angeles, California Remarks in an Interview With Reporters From Newscenter 4, KNBC-TV. 
September 23, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Early this morning I've talked to Dr. Brzezinski, the national security adviser, and to Secretary Brown and also communicated with Ed Muskie, who is now at the United Nations. Our own position is one of strict neutrality. And we're doing all we can, through the U.N. and through other means, to bring a peaceful conclusion to this combat that seems to be waged so far—most of the action seems to be by air or naval forces and with a minimum involvement at this point, so far as we know, of ground forces. 
I don't see any way at this time that this altercation between Iran and Iraq will affect the safety or the lives of the hostages nor the date of their release. But it's too early to assess that with any sort of final conclusion. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, there's no indication of that at all so far. Iran has come through a very long and tedious and extended period of forming a government. They've elected the members of their parliament. They now have for the first time a Prime Minister and a speaker of the parliament plus a President. They're putting together the final identity of the Cabinet. And of course, Khomeini still enjoys a great influence on the entire process. So, I believe that the likelihood of a destabilization of the Iran Government is not very great
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Iraq has been exporting lately, I think, about 3 million barrels of oil per day. Iran's export has been down to about 500,000 or half a million barrels per day. Obviously with the Straits of Hormuz and also the other areas that are closed—Shatt al Arab-closed or at least restrained, this will have an adverse affect on oil supplies in the world market. Although no interruption of oil supplies is good for us, this is a better time, if we had to choose one, because there is a large supply of oil on world markets (relative to demand)* at this particular moment, and also we (in the U.S.)* have perhaps the highest reserve supplies of oil on hand that I can remember. 
So, a temporary interruption of oil shipments from Iraq and Iran will not be very serious, but the prospect of an extended interruption would be very serious to us. However, the only solution to this for us is certainly not any sort of engagement between Iran and Iraq by our own forces, but simply an effort to bring a peaceful solution to this problem. 
THE PRESIDENT. We have never taken a position that Iran or Iraq should be a threat to which we would respond with our force or might. The principle that I've described is if the Soviet Union should move into that area, it would be a threat to our vital needs in this country. That's the principle that I described in my State of the Union speech, but not involving Iran and Iraq's control over their own waterways. 
THE PRESIDENT. This threat to the oil supplies from Iran and Iraq is a vivid demonstration of the need for the exact energy policy that my administration has put through the Congress and now has implemented. Every day this year we are importing 1 ? to 2 million barrels of oil from overseas less than we did just a year ago. This is a notable achievement by the American people, based upon the new energy policy that we've put forward. If this interruption of supply should continue, then I would have to callon the American people to restrict their consumption of oil even more severely on a voluntary basis, which I think would be adequate, with a patriotic tone to it.
THE PRESIDENT. The worst thing I could do as President would be to escalate this disruption or altercation between Iran and Iraq to an even greater international crisis because of ill-considered decisions by myself. What we want to do is to calm the situation and not aggravate it. And so any comment by me about the use of American forces would be completely inappropriate. 
Our forces have been built up in the Indian Ocean and in the Persian Gulf region to protect our interests and to let the people there know that the fate of the hostages is very important to us, and stability and peace in the region are very important to us. But I have no inclination to act precipitously or to take any action that might aggravate an already dangerous situation. 
We'll be calm, steady, open in our diplomatic posture, and working as best we can with other nations and with Iran and Iraq to resolve this entire problem peacefully. The basic decision, of course, is within the government structure of Iran and Iraq. We'll offer our good services to enhance peace, and if it's accepted, we'll be gratified. But we're not going to interfere

San Jose, California Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
September 23, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I just wanted to say very briefly that I have stayed in touch this morning with Dr. Brzezinski, with Harold Brown, the Secretary of Defense, and have recently communicated with Secretary of State Muskie, who is at the United Nations in New York. We all are doing everything possible, through international means and also through individual countries' contacts, to help terminate the conflict that presently exists between Iran and Iraq. 
Apparently air strikes against one another have increased today, with some reports that I've had that the oil refineries both in Iraq and Iran have suffered some damage. Also Baghdad has been attacked through aerial means. So far most of the conflict has been through air and naval forces, but there has been some movement apparently of ground forces from Iraq into the Iranian territory. We are concerned that this might escalate further between the two countries. 
We are concerned also that the supply of oil to the Western World and to the rest of the world might be interrupted or reduced. In recent months Iraq has been producing and shipping out about 3 million barrels of oil per day, Iran only about a half-million barrels of oil per day. But some nations, not ourselves, are heavily dependent on these shipments of oil. We hope that the countries involved will honor the international nature of the passage for ships through the Straits of Hormuz, and we will, of course, restrain ourselves and do everything that we can do to minimize any further danger of further escalation of the conflict. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't know. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we hope and we expect that the conflict between Iran and Iraq will not have any effect on the safety or lives of the hostages. We will be consulting with other nations about the international straits. As I say, we buy very little oil directly from either Iraq and none from Iran. But countries like Brazil, Japan, Italy, France are heavily dependent on shipments of oil from Iraq. We'll be consulting with others. We do have military forces in the area, but we don't anticipate at all the use of American military forces. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think I'd better restrain my answers to those I've already given

Portland, Oregon Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraising Reception. 
September 23, 1980

Today I've been monitoring very closely and dealing to some degree with the combat between Iran and Iraq. It's a disturbing thing. I've just been on the phone-the secure telephone that has encoded voices, going back and forth—with Dr. Brzezinski and earlier with Secretary Brown and also exchanging messages with Secretary Muskie, who's at the United Nations. We hope that this combat will be quickly terminated and that peace can be restored between Iran and Iraq. 
Baghdad has been bombed. The refineries built in Iraq and in Iran have been damaged, and we are very deeply concerned about the free movement of oil. As you know, we don't buy much oil from Iraq and none from Iran, but some of our allies and our friends in this hemisphere and in Europe and in Japan are heavily dependent on that kind of shipment. So, we'll do everything we can in a peaceful way to add our voice to that of other nations to resolve this issue without further bloodshed. And we will not become involved in the combat, and we are urging and insisting that the Soviet Union and other nations do not interfere in this very dangerous situation around the Persian Gulf

Tacoma, Washington Remarks in an Interview With KOMO-TV. 
September 23, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I've been monitoring the situation, obviously, very closely, because it's important to us, talking to the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State, who happens to be at the United Nations headquarters in New York, and to Dr. Brzezinski, and my other advisers. 
We have a deep concern about the conflict between Iran and Iraq. The chance of that conflict spreading further in those two nations and maybe involving others is a very important consideration for us. 
We hope that there'll be a termination as soon as possible to all the bloodshed and the fighting and also that the supplies of oil are not interrupted to other nations. We buy no oil from Iran and very little, if any, from Iraq. 
Our position is that we will not get involved in the conflict at all. We are staying neutral completely. And we expect other nations, like the Soviet Union, also to stay out of any involvement in this area. We'll do everything we can through the United Nations and through other international fora and working with individual countries in the Moslem world and in that region to try to bring a quick end to the combat between Iran and Iraq. 
This is a very important region strategically to us. So far as I know, there is no direct effect on the life or safety of the hostages. 
We don't get much oil from Iraq. They produce about 3 million barrels per day, shipped heavily to countries like Brazil, France, Italy, and Japan, and of course Iran is producing very little oil for export, only about a half million barrels per day. 
THE PRESIDENT. I see no chance that we will put military forces into action there. I think the best thing for me to do is protect our national interest with caution and with forbearance and with using our great influence to bring peace between the two warring countries
Also, the Iraqis attacked the major oil refinery in Abadan in Iran. These refineries are primarily for producing products like kerosene and gasoline that are used within those two countries, not used for export

THE PRESIDENT. We've never been on hold. This is a problem that's always on my mind. We've had two basic commitments since the first day the hostages were taken. The first one is to protect the honor and the integrity of our Nation and to protect our own vitalinterests and, secondly, to avoid taking any action on my part that might endanger the lives or the well-being of the hostages or their chance, ultimately, to come to freedom. We're still pursuing that policy, steadily and cautiously, but firmly. 
We also use every possible avenue of communication with Iranian officials, and we've been waiting until Iran has a government established. The delays have been aggravating and very discouraging to us, but they are approaching now a time when their government will be established. They have a President elected who is in favor of releasing the hostages. They've had a Foreign Minister now, an acting Foreign Minister, Ghotzbadeh, who does want the hostages released. They have a Prime Minister and a speaker of the Majles, or the parliament, and they've elected all the parliament members. The only thing they lack now in completing their government is the choice of the remaining members of the cabinet, and I hope that'll be done within the next few days. 
I don't predict any early release of the hostages. I don't want to build up unwarranted expectations. But we will fervently pursue, through every possible avenue, a resolution of this problem and a return to safety and freedom of the hostages. In the meantime, we will not do anything to endanger their lives.


Situation in Iraq and Iran Remarks Concerning the Conflict. 
September 24, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I've met this morning with my principal advisers to review the very dangerous situation created by the conflict between Iran and Iraq. Although the United States is in no way involved in this dispute—and charges to the contrary are obviously and patently false—it is important to make clear our position in this matter. 
The fighting between Iran and Iraq is causing needless hardship and suffering among the people involved. It represents a danger to the peace and stability of the region. There should be absolutely no interference by any other nation in this conflict. The fighting should be promptly terminated. Any grievances between Iran and Iraq should be settled at the negotiating table and not on the battlefield. 
I know that the conflict has caused considerable concern that world oil supplies might be severely reduced, therefore driving up oil prices and endangering the economic security of the consuming nations. This concern is not justified by the present situation. It is true that oil companies and shipments relating directly to Iran and Iraq have been interrupted or suspended during the outbreak of the hostilities. But even if this suspension of Iran and Iraqi shipments should persist for an extended period of time, the consuming nations can compensate for this shortfall. 
Oil inventories in the world's major oilconsuming nations are now at an alltime high. The world's margin of oil supply security is much greater today than in the winter of 1978 and '79, when the Iranian revolution reduced oil supplies at a time when reserve oil supplies were very low. Our greater security today is due in part to energy conservation and also the substitution of other fuels for oil, both in the United States and in other consuming nations. This has facilitated the building up of reserve stocks to much more satisfactory levels than did occur in 1979. Hence, there is no reason for a repetition of the shortages or the price escalations that resulted in 1979. 
Let me repeat that we have not been and we will not become involved in the conflict between Iran and Iraq. 
One final point, very important to Americans, is, in our concern for the dangerous situation created by this conflict, we have not forgotten for one moment the American hostages still held captive in Iran. We continue our work for their prompt and safe release, and we continue to hold the Government of Iran responsible for the safety and the well being of the American hostages. Thank you very much. 
THE PRESIDENT. We're consulting the other nations about what ought to be done to keep the Strait of Hormuz open and therefore access to the Persian Gulf. 
THE PRESIDENT. We're consulting through every means with Iran, as we have been for many months, to try to seek the release of the hostages, but that particular point would perhaps be better for me not to single out from the others



1980 Hispanic Democratic Victory Dinner Remarks at the Dinner. 
September 26, 1980

Rosalynn, my wife, is a sensitive person. She understands people. She also listens. And when I have to be in the White House dealing with Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, SALT, Congress, other things that are pressing on me, she, quite often, as you know, is in communities listening to your people and bringing those messages back to me so that I can be a better President


World Bank Group and International Monetary Fund Remarks at the Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors. 
September 30, 1980

Because of sustained oil production and because of worldwide conservation measures, the world's oil stocks are now at an alltime high, and these reserves will help to offset the effect of temporary reductions in supply, such as that which has been caused by the present conflict between Iran and Iraq. However, we are keenly aware that some nations are seriously threatened by even a temporary interruption in normal oil supplies. Thus we are working with your countries in the United Nations and through other public, international fora to end this conflict as quickly as possible


Flint, Michigan Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 1, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I don't believe that the present war between Iran and Iraq has changed the status of the hostages as far as their safety is concerned. I don't believe it's threatened their lives further, and I don't believe it's changed, as far as I can determine, the prospect for their return to their homes and to freedom. 
Yesterday, the Majles, or the parliament or congress, of Iran was debating the hostage question, ignoring, at least for those few hours, the threat to their nation's existence from Iraq. The problem with Iran is that we have not had any government with which we could deal. And they have now finally got a President, a Prime Minister, a parliament elected, a speaker of the parliament, and they're getting a cabinet put together now. Once that's done, I think we'll have a good prospect of improving the chances to get those hostages home. 
We have been very cautious since the very beginning to do two things: First of all is to protect the honor and the integrity and the interest of our Nation—that's my responsibility; and secondly, not to do anything from the White House or from my own public statements that would endanger the lives or safety of the hostages and their chance to come back home to freedom. I've never seen any incompatibility between doing both those things at the same time. 
And I'm being very cautious in this trying time for Iran, to let them know that we're staying neutral, that we'll do nothing to try to punish Iran, that we want our hostages back. We want Iran to be a secure nation. We want their own people to choose their own government and in the future, when it's mutually advantageous, to restore normal relationships between our two countries. But I need to get every American to understand that our priorities are twofold: to protect our Nation's interests and to protect those hostages and to keep our country at peace. These are the things that are important to us. 
The last thing I'd like to say is this: It's always difficult for a powerful nation to be patient and not to capitalize in a political way over a tragedy like the capturing of our innocent hostages. But the American people have shown that patience; we've acted in a very mature way. And I believe we'll continue that process and that attitude. 
My constant prayers are that the hostages will be released safely and will come back home. And I don't believe that war, as serious as it is—and we're trying to end it—has further endangered those precious 52 Americans about whom we're so concerned


Flint, Michigan Interview With Joe Stroud and Remer Tyson of the Detroit Free Press. 
October 1, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I would pray that the hostages would come home at the earliest possible moment regardless of the date of the election. I have never failed, any morning when I woke up, to pray that God would let those hostages come home safe at the earliest possible moment. I've never used the hostage issue for political purposes and never will. 
The allegation that I would play with the lives of innocent hostages for political purposes or delay their coming home to have some good news just before an election is ridiculous, and his further statement that I somehow or another caused the war between the Iranians and the Iraqis is, you know, is ridiculous. 
THE PRESIDENT.—try to avoid saying things, you know, about that. 
THE PRESIDENT. One time since last November we have had every element in Iran committed to let those hostages go, and that was that particular morning. It happened to be the morning of some primaries. We had an average, I think, of six Primaries a week during that whole period. I mean it was almost impossible to find a time that wasn't before or after or during a primary. 
We got up at 4 o'clock that morning, waiting for the final culminating public statement from the President of Iran that would confirm that the negotiations that we had formed with them were successful. The militant students had agreed to let the hostages go, the President of Iran had agreed to let the hostages go, the Revolutionary Council had agreed to let the hostages go, and the Foreign Minister had agreed to let the hostages go. The only thing we had to do was to wait until, I believe, I 1 o'clock or 12 o'clock noon in Iran, when the President of that nation was going to make a public statement
confirming that the agreement was legitimate. 
He made that statement publicly. We monitored it very quickly. It was transmitted to me in the White House. The Secretary of State was there; the Secretary of Defense was there; the national security adviser was there; the Vice President was there; Jody [Powell] was there. We'd been there since 4 o'clock in the morning. And when that message got to me confirming that point, I went before the American people and said we believe we have finally arrived at the point where the hostages will be coming home. 
Because of timidity on the part of some of the Iranian officials and some argument about things like how will the hostages be actually carried physically out of the compound to the airport, there was a delay. And subsequent to that, instead of having the Revolutionary Council prevail, with only two dissenting votes—I think there are 15 or 20 on the Revolutionary Council—Bani-Sadr, the President, said, "We've got to have a unanimous vote in the Revolutionary Council." And the agreement that we had evolved, using intermediaries and the most detailed negotiating techniques, did not come to pass. It was a great surprise to us, a disappointment, a profound disappointment. 
That's the only time during this whole period when we thought we had a final agreement involving all of the people involved in Iran. 
What we did was wait until the public statement was made in Iran. We analyzed-we had it translated into English from Farsi. We read the statement to make sure that the agreement was confirmed publicly, and then I went to the American people. It was a very logical time schedule. This is the first time I've ever explained that, by the way


Dayton, Ohio Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 2, 1980

The other part of the so-called Mideast—I think you might want to extend it to the Persian Gulf; I won't try to make geographical definitions here—is still a very troubling part of the world. The revolution in Iran has not yet been replaced with a stable, coherent government. The Iranians have had a very difficult time in putting together their own government. They have finally got a parliament elected—they call it a Majles-they've got a speaker of the parliament, they've got a Prime Minister, and a President now, they're putting together a cabinet. And we believe that when they get a government intact that the country might be more stable. But that process has been interrupted, as you know, by the attack on Iran by Iraq. 
So far, we have been instrumental in confining that conflict to just those two nations and trying to discourage [encourage]1 both those countries to sit down and negotiate their differences. We can get along without oil from Iran and Iraq, but we cannot get along without oil, ourselves or the rest of the world, from the rest of the Persian Gulf region. The United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia ship about 12 million barrels of oil every day out of the Straits of Hormuz, and we will use whatevermeans is required to keep the Straits of Hormuz open. 
In the meantime, we want to prevent any further disturbance that might precipitate a Soviet involvement in Iran or Iraq. We use our alliances with France and Australia and Great Britain and other western countries, plus our friendship with Saudi Arabia, with Pakistan, and other Moslem countries, to dampen down any conflict there. In the future we'll continue these policies
I was in the Navy for 11 years, 7 years after I finished at Annapolis, and spent the last part of my life in submarines. A lot of that time was at sea. We have had some very long, extended cruises for some of our ships in the Indian Ocean, as you know, since the hostages were captured by Iran, but in general we're trying also to explore ways where the families of military people, men or women, can be both closer to them, assigned to the same place where the military persons are assigned, and to let that rotation from unpopular or unpleasant foreign stations be more rapid



Meeting With President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq of Pakistan Remarks to Reporters Following the Meeting. 
October 3, 1980

In addition, we are deeply grateful for President Zia's role as a spokesman for the Islamic Conference. His recent visit to Tehran and then to Baghdad to try to limit the combat, the loss of blood, and also to bring to an early conclusion the war between Iran and Iraq is of great importance to us all


Milwaukee, Wisconsin Excerpt From an Interview With John McCullough of WTMJ-TV. 
October 6, 1980

The biggest threat to our security would be if the Soviets should be tempted to move into Iran or to move into an area where they can control the Persian Gulf itself or the access to it. This would be a direct threat not only to our own security but the security of other Western nations who depend on oil supplies from that region for economic well-being


Nashville, Tennessee Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 9, 1980

We live in a troubled world and, as you know, in Iran, Iraq, other places, they don't know peace today. The first responsibility of every President—Johnson, Jackson, Polk, other Presidents—is for the security of our Nation. It's a responsibility that's on my shoulder every moment

In every campaign when a candidate charged that the Russians were ahead of us, after the campaign those charges were proven to be false. A perfect example is my Republican opponent's recent suggestion that United States weakness is what caused us to stay neutral in the war between Iran and Iraq. It's a sign of weakness if you have to get involved militarily in a combat. It's a sign of strength if you can protect our Nation's interests peacefully. He also said that somehow or another, our Nation being weak, which it's not, helped even to cause the war between Iran and Iraq. That kind of statement doesn't help

I had a chance, as you know, in the Afghanistan situation, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, to either takemilitaryaction or economic and political action. We decided to take economic and political action. It's been very effective. Now in the Iran-Iraq war our country is staying neutral. We're not going to inject ourselves into that combat, and we're not staying neutral because we are weak. 
We do have, however, vitalinterests in the Persian Gulf region. From the Persian Gulf the rest of the world gets about 15 million barrels of oil per day-from Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, and, primarily, from Saudi Arabia. If that Persian Gulf was closed and tankers couldn't go in and out to load and bring their oil to us and to other nations, it would be a devastating blow to the rest of the world. Oil prices would skyrocket, nations would have to shut down their industrial plants, and we would be threatened. Our security would be threatened. So, I have announced that we will takeaction, if necessary, to keep the Strait of Hormuz open and to make sure that that Persian Gulf region is accessible to the rest of the world. 
I can't spell out to you this morning in public what I would do or will do. But we will take necessaryaction to make sure that goal is realized. We've also consulted very closely with our allies and friends to say, "What would you do to help us if the Strait of Hormuz is threatened to be closed and if the rest of the world is threatened with this deprivation of oil?" 
So, just letting other nations, friends or potential adversaries, know clearly what we will do is a good way to restrain them from further threatening the peace. We'll also do all we can to end the Iran-Iraq war as quickly as possible, and if we can't end it soon, to keep it confined just to those two countries



St. Petersburg, Florida Interview With Hugh Smith of WTVT-TV. 
October 10, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Never a day goes by, never an hour goes by that I don't think about those hostages, and I pray for them every day. It's been one of my most serious problems as President, and I hope they'll be returned as soon as possible. There's no way I can predict when. 
I've done two things from the very beginning, and I've never changed our policy as a Nation or myself as a President. One is I've protected the interests and the integrity and honor of my country, and at the same time I've done everything I could to avoid making a statement or an action that might endanger the lives or the safety of those hostages or put an obstacle in the way of their returning home to freedom. I'll continue to do that in a very cautious way. 
It's a serious mistake for any candidate, Governor Reagan or myself or anyone else, to inject the question of the American hostages into the political campaign. I think it's not good for the hostages themselves, it's not good for our relationships with Iran, and it might create an impediment to a successful resolution of this problem and the return of the hostages to our homes. 
THE PRESIDENT. I have no idea. I have hoped from the very beginning of their incarceration in Iran that each week would bring some progress. We've been persistently and repeatedly disappointed. 
The problem has been that there is no government in Iran with the authority to speak. We had negotiated their release, as you may remember, I think in the month of May, with their President, their Foreign Minister, the revolutionary council, even with the militants who were holding the hostages. It was announced by their President they would be released. But they reversed themselves and have not done so. Now there is a parliament, called a Majles, in Iran. They have a speaker elected, they have a Prime Minister now and a President. They don't at this time have a Foreign Minister, but most of the cabinet's intact. 
We have hope—that's all—but no expectation of any release at a certain time. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't anticipate the use of any rescue operation at this time or in the future. 
THE PRESIDENT. I see. Yes, it is. It's a concern to me, because we want to see that combat over. And if it should be stalemated or continued over a period of time we want to see it confined just to those two nations, Iran and Iraq. We've used all the influence that we can to discourage other nations from becoming militarily involved. 
We have major naval and air forces in the Persian Gulf region, in the northern part of the Indian Ocean, that can protect our own interests, if necessary, by keeping the Strait of Hormuz open. 
Libya, as you know, is a radical terrorist regime under Colonel Qaddafi, and they are unpredictable. I think they exemplify the threat of terrorism throughout the world. This is a blight on the entire universe of civilized nations, even absent a war between Iran and Iraq. 
Obviously terrorism in the Mideast, the Persian Gulf region, is a contributory factor to the combat that presently exists between Iran and Iraq. But stamping out terrorism all over the world, and particularly based on racism, or religious beliefs, is something that addresses me, the American people, and all civilized people. 
THE. PRESIDENT. No, we're not involved in any nation where combat is being conducted. Obviously, it's important to us to stabilize the Middle East based on the treaty between Israel and Egypt, which we hope to extend to Jordan and to Syria and to Lebanon in the future. 
The Saudi Arabians on the Persian Gulf, far removed from Israel, obviously is a nation that we want to see protected and kept at peace. The four airplanes that you described, we call them AWAGS planes, it's an aircraft early warning plane. It goes up into the air with very elaborate and effective radar coverage of a large area, stays way back from the combat area, and just provides information for those who want to defend themselves in case there is an aerial attack. 
So, I think that this is a peaceful contribution to prevent an unwarranted attack on a peaceful nation, Saudi Arabia. It's not an injection underanycircumstances of American military forces into a combat area


The Nation's Economy Radio Address to the Nation. 
October 12, 1980

We've cut our foreign oil consumption by 20 percent in the last year alone, some 1 1/2 million barrels a day. No other country has matched that record. That is extremely important to every American. The war between Iraq and Iran puts this achievement in perspective. Today the United States alone is saving almost half the amount of oil exported before the war by both those countries combined. We've made ourselves and our allies that much less vulnerable to international blackmail or to a break in the world's oil lifeline


West Frankfort, Illinois Remarks to Miners and Employees of Old Ben Coal Mine No. 25. 
October 13, 1980

The last time there was a crisis in the Persian Gulf, during the Iranian revolution, the world oil supplies were cut by about 4 million barrels per day. We had long gas lines and fears of worse, as you know. Today, as the war between Iran and Iraq continues, again oil supplies throughout the world have been cut roughly 4 million barrels per day, about the same. But this time our country has been ready. We are ahead of that crisis. And you've not seen any lines, and you've not seen the world brought to its knees by a temporary shortage of oil


St. Louis, Missouri Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 13, 1980

You probably remember, Thelma Jean, a couple of years ago or more when we lost, the whole world lost, about 4 million barrels of oil per day with the Iranian revolution. You remember there were gas lines and a lot of despair and skyrocketing prices. Recently the Iran-Iraq war erupted and we again lost about 4 million barrels of oil per day. No gas lines. No despair. Stable prices. The reason is that our Nation was prepared. When I came into office we had a very despairing outlook on farm income, agriculture, exports—in the pits. We did have very low net and gross income. I've already given you the statistics. I won't repeat it. But we've made good progress now


Yatesville, Pennsylvania Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 15, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Joe, for almost a year now, I don't believe an hour has gone by on any day that I've spent, during the hours that I was awake, that I didn't think about or even say a prayer for those hostages. We have been through several phases of trying to get the hostages released, as you know—working directly with the Iranian officials; working through intermediaries from other countries sending secret missions to Iran, meeting Iranian officials; either directly or through surrogates in other countries; working through the United Nations; making public statements; working with the Iranian officials—the President and the Foreign Minister both of whom agreed to release the hostages back in May. 
So far as we know, the best intelligence information we have from various sources, which I can't describe to you, the hostages are all alive and they're all safe. We have a way of communicating directly on occasion with three of the hostages who are being held in the foreign ministry or the department of state building in Tehran. I don't believe that the Iran-Iraq war has put the hostages' lives in danger. 
I have maintained since they were first taken two basic principles that are not incompatible one with another: first, to protect the integrity and the principles and the interests of my Nation, and secondly, not to do anything as a President that would endanger the lives or the safety of the hostages or their chance to come back to freedom at the earliest possible moment. 
We believe that there ought to be an end to the hostilities between Iran and Iraq and an immediate commencement of negotiations to settle the disputed boundaries between them. This reflects the long-standing policy of our country that all territorial disputes should be settled peacefully and not by aggression. The United States remains committed to the proposition that the national security and integrity of Iran is in the interest of national stability. 
We oppose any effort to dismember Iran, to cut away part of it and separate it from the rest of Iran. I hope and pray that now that Iran finally has elected officials-they've got a President now; they've got a Prime Minister now; they've got a parliament elected called a Majles; and they've got a speaker of that parliament elected—since those officials are now in office, there may be a chance for us to make some progress—I can't predict anything because they're so unpredictable-toward having someone speak for the Government of Iran and realize that they have been extremely ill-advised in keeping those hostages in their country. 
So, we're doing everything we can to end the war. I don't think it's affecting the lives and safety of the hostages. We're making every effort to get those hostages home safe, and I don't believe that we-well, I can say that all of the information that we have indicates that the hostages are indeed alive and safe.
THE PRESIDENT. Okay. The access to 49 of our hostages is very irregular. They are permitted to receive some letters from back home and, on a few occasions, they have been permitted to make telephone calls. And also on a few occasions, the Iranians have let ministers or priests go into the compound to talk to them on special occasions. 
Three of the hostages—Bruce Laingen, who was the head of the entire Embassy staff, and two others are in the state department or the foreign ministry of Tehran, and they do let diplomats from the Swiss Embassy or the Spanish Embassy or others go in and talk to them on occasion. They take them news, and they are from the outside world, and they also take them books and some magazines that have every now and then been censored. 
The Iranians, so far as I know, have not mistreated in a physical abuse or endangered the lives of those hostages. As you know, not too long ago, one of the hostages got sick, and they immediately arranged for him to be returned to this country—a young man from Maine. 
I think everything we can do in the way of prayer, in the way of wearing yellow ribbons—and I've got one at home that I wear on occasion, too—in the means of letting American people know that our hostages are still there, adding our support to the United Nations' effort and to efforts made through the Swiss and the Belgians and others to reach the Iranian officials, to try to make sure this war doesn't spread to other countries—those are the kind of things all of us can do together. 
Every day we have diplomatic efforts being made, directed by me, to try to reach the people in Iran who can ultimately make a decision. Even since the war began with Iraq, when Iran's security is directly threatened by Iraqi invading forces, their Majles or their parliament has still been debating how and under what circumstances to release the hostages. They've appointed, now, a committee in the parliament or congress to work out some way they could present back to the government for the hostages' release. 
I can't predict to you any progress in the foreseeable future, although I pray that they'll be released every day. But I think the more we can do here to remind Americans of the hostages' plight, innocent people, the more chance that message has got to get through to them. If they don't know it, their parents know it and their husbands and wives know it and their children know it. 
I would hate for those hostage families ever to believe that we didn't love them and care for them. Recently, I have signed a bill, this week I've signed a bill that the Congress passed, excluding those hostages from having to pay income taxes and giving them other special privileges for their families and, when they return, educational benefits for their children. So, I think the more we do the better off the hostage families are, and that word leaks back to the hostages, I feel sure. 
It also lets other nations know that we've not forgotten them. I want the Germans and the British and the French and the Algerians and everyone else to know that we want those hostages back, so that every time a diplomat from one of those countries goes to Iran, he'll say, "You ought to let those hostages go." I think the cumulative effect of that might make the difference. And I'm very grateful to you and the Jaycee-ettes for what you are doing. I'll be glad to take your ribbon when I leave

Lyndhurst, New Jersey Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Local Residents. 
October 15, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. All right. As you know, since the hostages were taken, innocent people, by militants or terrorists in Iran, this has been a constant concern of mine. No day has gone by, no hour has gone by when I was awake that I wasn't thinking about and often praying for those hostages. 
I've had two goals in mind, as your President and as their President: first of all, to protect the integrity and the principles and the interests of our own country; and secondly, and compatibly with it, not to take any action as a President that would endanger the lives or safety of those hostages or prevent their safe return to freedom as early as possible. We've been through a series of constant diplomatic, public and secret, negotiations with people in Iran who might possibly speak for that country. So far, we've not been successful except that we have protected our Nation's interests, we have served to protect the lives and safety of the hostages. 
Now Iran finally has a government. They have an elected parliament, a Congress-they call it a Majles. They've elected their own speaker. They have a prime Minister, a President, and they're putting together a Cabinet. As you know, Iran is now being attacked by Iraq, an invading nation, and their own security is at stake. They're an isolated country. They're a kind of a pariah in the international community. Their trade with us has been cut off. And they are relatively serious in their suffering, just because they still hold those 52 innocent people. 
We get fairly good intelligence on Iran from varying sources. So far as I know, all 52 hostages still in Iran are safe and well. We have some ability to talk to three of them; Bruce Laingen, who was in charge of the diplomatic corps there, and two others are in the state department, or the foreign ministry of Iran. And I think that's about all I can tell you about it. 
Every day from the very beginning, we have used every avenue to try to reach someone who can speak for Iran. The President of Iran and most of their public officials now say publicly that they want those hostages to be returned here safely. The parliament, or the Majles has appointed a committee to work out the mechanism by which the hostages could be released. I can't mislead you by saying that there's an immediate prospect, or a sure prospect even, that they will be released, but my hope and prayer is that they will be. And I believe that we have made as much effort as possible to secure their safe return. 
So, I don't feel discouraged about it. I think we've been through worse times than we are in right now. And perhaps now that they have a government and are in danger themselves, we have a better chance to get the hostages back than before
THE PRESIDENT. In the first place, let me say that I don't believe that the war is going to escalate to any major degree in the near future. We believe that disputes between countries over boundaries, international boundaries, should be settled not by invasion or aggression but by negotiation. And we are using all of our efforts in the United Nations, working with other countries, to bring those two countries to the bargaining table to settle this dispute peacefully. 
Secondly, we do not intend to inject American troops into any sort of land war in the Persian Gulf region, barring some completely unpredictable circumstances like a Soviet invasion of Iran or something of that kind, which I don't think will happen. 
We will take whatever stepsarenecessary to keep the Strait of Hormuz open so that our country and other nations will have access to the countries on the west side of the Gulf. This is important to us, because we're getting now between 12 and 15 million barrels a day of oil—all the consuming nations together—from Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and also from the United Arab Emirates. And that supply of oil, if interrupted for an extended period of time, would cause severe economic problems and endanger our own Nation's security. 
We have a very large naval task force there, with superb fighter planes, to take care of our needs to keep that strait open. So, I believe that those forces already in place, Navy and Naval Air, will be adequate in the future. I don't see any prospect of any ground forces or troops to go in and protect our interests


Secaucus, New Jersey Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraising Reception. 
October 15, 1980

We've seen a harnessing of new concepts brought about to us by the new energy challenges. That has not struck, again, awe or despair in the American people. Not too long ago, as you know, in the revolution of Iran the world lost about 4 million barrels of oil per day. We had long gas lines, and the American economic system was placed into consternation. A lot of political furor was apparent in the communities of our country. Recently, because the Congress has acted so courageously in giving us an energy policy, for the first time, we lost 4 million barrels of oil again when Iran and Iraq began their conflict. There was hardly a tremor in our country because in that short interval of time, we have slashed imported oil. In the last year alone, we have cut our oil imports over 35 percent, and today we're importing 2 million barrels of oil less per day than we did just a year ago. That's tremendous achievement


Windsor Locks, Connecticut Informal Exchange With Reporters on Departure From Connecticut. 
October 16, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No, no. We've been trying to get the hostages released ever since they were taken, and we've used every possible means we can to negotiate or to send direct or indirect messages to the Iranians. But I don't have any progress— 
THE PRESIDENT. No imminent, no. 
THE PRESIDENT. There's always a potential. We have not made any arrangements to meet with Mr. Rajai, but if he should be amenable to a meeting we would certainly continue to follow our practice of meeting with any Iranian official who had a possibility of speaking authoritatively for their Government. 
THE PRESIDENT. I don't think so. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I don't know whether he has or not. I don't have any information that he has. But we will continue to pursue, in every possible way, the possibility of having the hostages released, as we have for the last 10 or 11 months. But there is no imminent prospect, so far as I know, of the hostages being released. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, we've made our position clear on the hostilities between Iran and Iraq—that they should be resolved peacefully, through negotiations; their disputes over the border should be settled in that fashion, using international intermediaries if necessary; and that disputes like this should not be settled through aggression or through invasion of another country's territory. That's our position, and I think it ought to be acceptable as our Nation's position in the U.N. Security Council.


Hempstead, New York Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 16, 1980

In the first place, ever since our hostages have been taken—and they're all innocent people—I've had two goals in mind. One is to protect the interests of our own country and our integrity and our honor, and, secondly—and they're not in conflict—not to do anything as President that might endanger the lives or the safety or the future return of those hostages to freedom in their homeland. I've also tried to work with the families of the hostages, meeting with them personally, letting the Secretary of State meet with them, my wife's met with them, to make sure they understand that America has not forgotten them. 
We've tried to negotiate with the Iranians in every possible way—directly, indirectly, through the United Nations, through secret missions, every other way. The main problem, Nicholas, has been this: There has not been any government in Iran or any leader with whom we could talk. Lately, though, the Iranians have elected a President and a Prime Minister and a speaker of their parliament, which they call a Majles, and they are putting together a cabinet. Their Prime Minister is coming to the United States today to appear in the United Nations. 
We are trying, as we have every day for the last 10 or 11 months, to work with the Iranians, to resolve the problems between us and to get the hostages back home safely. I don't know when that effort will be successful. I can't tell you that. All the information, however, that we have about the hostages is that they are today safe, they are not being abused. And three of them, who are separated from the other 49, we have a way to communicate with them every now and then, either an ambassador goes. from Switzerland or Spain or some other country and to talk to them, or on occasion they can talk to someone in our country on the telephone. So, at this moment, so far as we know, the hostages are alive and well. 
We don't know exactly when they'll be released. We've always maintained our hope that they would be released, and I will continue to protect our country and not to do anything as President to endanger their lives or safety and to make sure they come home free.


I might repeat myself that all of our ground divisions now are in much better readiness state than they were 3 1/2 years ago, much better than the Soviet Union equivalent divisions. We've got a strategic force now ready to move, conventional forces called rapid deployment force. We're building it up good, and in the northern part of the Indian Ocean, outside of the Persian Gulf, we've got a formidable array of Navy, with F-14 planes, each one having unbelievable electronics. They can monitor, track six targets at the same time and shoot down those six targets with just one plane. And you've seen what the Iranian F-4's have done to Iraq, and what the F-14's are doing. You've seen what the Israeli F-15's have done with the MIG—25's that have been sent against them from Syria. That's the kind of weapons we have


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session with the Editorial Board of Associated Press. 
October 17, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Our policy on that has not changed. We have from the very beginning called for the honoring of international borders, the settlement of any dispute about the delineation of those borders by negotiation, not by combat. And Saddam Husayn's own description of their ultimate goals were the Shatt-al-Arab, which is a waterway, and no Iranian territory. 
It's obvious to me that the dismemberment of Iran or the carving out of a part of Iran to be separated from the rest would not be in our interest. And in any case in the world, an invasion or an aggression is something that we would condemn. 
THE PRESIDENT. We are neutral. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. 
We're not taking any sides in it. It's just a matter of our expressing clearly our longstanding position. This is the same position that we will take in the United Nations Security [Council] debate, if and when our time comes to speak. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think it would be inappropriate now to build up expectations for a breakthrough on the hostages. 
We have consistently sought every possible avenue, direct or indirect to anyone who could possibly speak with authority for the Iranian militants or the Government to get our hostages released and to remove the differences between the two countries. We are observing very carefully the fact that Iran now has most of their Government intact, with a President, a Prime Minister, a Majles, or parliament, a speaker of the house, or the Majles, chosen. And there have been some indications from Iran lately among some of these leaders that they think the hostages ought to be released. 
So, if we do have a possibility of negotiation, we will continue to pursue such a possibility as we have in the past. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. 
THE PRESIDENT. I can't respond to that, because that'll be up to him to decide, but we would be glad to make available someone to represent our Government and talk to him, he preferred it. But we don't have any indication that he has come in here for that purpose. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I would like for them to be released today, but I don't have any reason to predict that they will. 


Foreign Policy Radio Address to the Nation. 
October 19, 1980

A bitter war is now going on in the Persian Gulf, complicating even further our efforts to obtain the release of our hostages in Iran. Think how much more dangerous that new war would be if we did not have peace between Israel and Egypt, by far the most significant military powers in the region. We will continue to consult closely with Israel and with Egypt on strategic matters of mutual interest in our common effort to preserve the peace.


Youngstown, Ohio Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session During a Live Television Broadcast. 
October 20, 1980

In all the history of diplomacy, I guess all the recorded history of diplomacy, we've never seen a case where a government like the one that existed in Iran not only did not protect the Embassies of foreign countries but actually encouraged terrorists or militants to attack the American Embassy. This is an extraordinary circumstance, and I don't believe it will be repeated. But we will continue to work closely with the governments. 
So, they are safer than they used to be. We are much more cautious. We don't have as many Embassy staff members present in areas where disharmony or violence might occur, and we have called on foreign countries to help us as a preparatory or precautionary thing to prevent a recurrence of what happened in Iran. I don't think there's any real likelihood that a government like Iran, combined with demonstrators and terrorists like occurred in Iran, will repeat itself
THE PRESIDENT. You probably realize that this has been one of the most difficult things that I've ever had to face. I never go a day or even an hour without thinking about our hostages and what we can do to get them back. 
I've had two guiding principles in my life, as President, since the hostages were first taken. One is to protect the integrity and the interest of my country, and secondly, not to do anything, as President, under political pressures or any other reason, that would endanger the lives or safety of the hostages or interfere with their safe return to freedom as soon as possible. 
We've imposed strict prohibitions against any trade or commerce with Iran. We don't sell them oil equipment; we don't sell them spare parts for their military; we don't sell them anything that we can control under these circumstances. If Iran should release the hostages, then I would unfreeze their assets, which are several billions of dollars that were in banks here and in Europe. I would drop the embargo against trade with Iran and work toward a resumption of normal commerce with Iran in the future. It's to our advantage to have a strong Iran. It's to our advantage to have a united Iran, and we don't want to see the war that presently exists between Iraq and Iran be expanded any further in those two countries, and we don't want to see it involve other nations either. 
So, we want a peaceful Iran, a united Iran, a strong Iran, with a government that they choose. And we want to restore normal commerce and trade with Iran once those hostages are released


New York, New York Remarks at a Meeting With the Congregation of the Concord Baptist Church and State and Local Officials. 
October 20, 1980

I know, after talking with Governor Hugh Carey, who's with us today, and Charlie Rangel, that we must do something about the drug program in this community and up and down this coast. I wanted to announce at this moment that we have now completed plans on a major, concentrated effort, involving millions of dollars, already available to us in five northeastern cities—New York City, Newark, Baltimore, Washington, and Philadelphia. This will involve treatment of those suffering from drug addiction, intradiction to stop drugs coming in here from the Middle East—from Afghanistan, Pakistan, Iran, through Turkey, and others—and also the prosecution of those guilty of distributing drugs. We need to put them in jail and keep them there


Miami, Florida Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 21, 1980

Since I've been in the White House, there has never been a day that there wasn't a problem area somewhere in the world, sometimes two or three. And almost always, after a few weeks go by or sometimes just a few days, the nations who were involved in that dispute will take their case to the United Nations. Recently, Iran brought its case against Iraq to the Security Council of the United Nations. I think it might lead eventually to a resolution of that dispute without further spreading that war

In the first place, Adam, we have done and are doing all we can to bring the Iran-Iraq war to an end and to make sure that it doesn't spread any further and to try to make sure that no other nations get involved in it. So far, we don't detect any additional threat to the American hostages because of the war affecting Iran. 
Ever since our hostages were taken, we've had two principles in mind that I have tried to carry out: first, is to protect the interests of our own country, my country and yours, and to make sure that we didn't have our principles violated, we were not embarrassed, and we stood up for our rights; and secondly, to make sure that I didn't do anything as President, for political advantage or by mistake, that might endanger the lives or the safety of our hostages or interfere with their ultimate return back to freedom in this country. 
So far, we've been successful in both those efforts, although we've been very disappointed that the hostages didn't come back earlier. I can't predict to you that the hostages will come back soon. I don't know yet. It's not completely in our hands, of course. 
But in the past, up until just recently, we've not had anybody in Iran that could speak with authority for their country. At first, it was just militants and terrorists who took our innocent hostages. Later there was just a mass of confusion. But now Iran has elected a President, a Prime Minister, a parliament—they call it a Majles—and that Majles has now organized itself. They've got a speaker of the parliament, and they've elected a sevenperson committee to work out how to release the hostages. 
In the past, we've had one agreement all worked out with the President of Iran, the Foreign Minister of Iran, Mr. Ghotbzadeh, with the militants themselves, who were ready to release the hostages. And at the last minute, the President announced in Iran that everything had been worked out; we announced it over here that it had been worked out. And then because of timidity and delay, those hopes were dashed. 
So, I don't want to build up in your mind any new hopes that might be dashed, just to get some political advantage. We're working literally every day to get the hostages home. But I can tell you that I don't believe that the war has put the hostages in any greater danger, and I do believe that the hostages will come home safely before it's over
Let me say in closing that it's been a very good pleasure for me to come here, to have your questions about a series of issues, about the disaster areas, about religious ethics, about the retention of people in our Armed Forces, about the refugees who've come here from Cuba and from Haiti, about the status of a President and what a public servant ought to be, about the United Nations, about Iran, Iraq, and our hostages being held there, a broad range of issues that we've had a chance to discuss



Beaumont, Texas Remarks to Employees of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation. 
October 22, 1980

We're at the end of a 12,000-mile supply line, a very uncertain supply line. At the other end is danger, turmoil, uncertainty, sometimes the desire to bring this Nation to its knees. As you remember, the last time there was a crisis in the Persian Gulf, with the Iranian revolution, we lost about 4 million barrels of oil per day. America was thrown into confusion. It was a severe damage to our economic security. Long waiting lines at gas stations took place. 
This time, with a new energy policy now in the law books of our Nation, when the war between Iran and Iraq took place and we lost another 4 million barrels of oil per day, our Nation was able to withstand that shock without any damage to the quality of life or the security or confidence of the American people


Waco, Texas Remarks at a Rally With Local Residents. 
October 22, 1980

The latest example is my opponent's charge, for instance, that we are not involved in the Iran-Iraq war because we're weak. Obviously, that charge is untrue and false. Our country is strong. In fact, we have the most powerful naval force ever assembled in the Indian Ocean, with two carrier task forces in that region


Gloucester City, New Jersey Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Area Residents. 
October 24, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No, I don't. 
You know, one thing that concerns me a lot lately has been a buildup in the American press—the television, radio, and newspapers—of expectations that the hostages are going to come home early, that I don't think are justified. I don't have any way to know when the hostages might come home. And I think for us to expect that they're going to come home this weekend or next week or the following week is going to lead to very bitter disappointments in our country if they don't come home when we think they might. 
What we have done, since the very first day they were taken, is to protect their lives and their safety and make sure that someday they could come home to freedom and, also, not to violate our Nation's principles and our Nation's honor. But I think it would be a mistake for anyone to start trying to put a time schedule on When they're coming home. We've been disappointed too many times. So, let's just hope and pray they come home safely someday and don't plan on any particular date at this point


Wyoming, Michigan Remarks and a Question-and. Answer Session With High School Students. 
October 24, 1980

In the last 50 years no President has been able to say that they did not send American troops into combat, until this last 3 1/2 years that I've been in office. We'd lost eight brave young men who went into Iran to try to save the hostages, but they were not sent into combat

One thing is that we deployed very rapidly when the Persian Gulf threats arose, when our hostages were captured and when it became obvious that there was a disturbance there because of the revolution in Iran a little earlier, we deployed two major aircraft carrier task forces into the northern part of the Indian Ocean. And we have now pre-positioned equipment and materiel for about 10,000 marines and enough to operate 500 of our airplanes, and we've got five different places over there in that region now that we can use not as permanent bases, but as facilities

You probably have noticed that some of the American planes that we have sold to Israel, the F-15's, when they have used them and they've been challenged by the MIG-25's from Syria, the MIG-25's went down. And lately, even when Iran has some F-4's, which are not the most modern planes of our own, those planes are so formidable that in the war between Iran and Iraq, when those F-4's attacked the capital city of Iraq, Baghdad, the Iraqis don't even put up planes to try to stop them

THE PRESIDENT. Jo, I wouldn't get my hopes up. I hate to be discouraging. But I've been involved in this now for more than 11 months, and we've had private messages and also some public statements time after time after time that the hostages were going to be released imminently, soon. We've always been disappointed. And I think it's good for the American people to be very cautious about building up expectations about an early release of the hostages. 
I have literally prayed every day, sometimes several times during the day, that our hostages would be safe, would not lose their lives, and would come back to freedom, and I've always wished they would come back that day. 
But I don't want to build up your hopes too much. We don't have any clear signal from the Iranian leaders about when the hostages will or will not be released, and we don't know their terms, because the Majles, or parliament, committee still has not reported their terms. 
I have an additional responsibility on my shoulders above and beyond or at least equal to the safety of the hostages, and that is not to betray my country, not to do anything that would bring discredit on my country or violate our honor or interfere with the interests of my Nation. I have never found those two things to be incompatible, protecting my Nation and protecting the hostages. But I cannot predict to you that they'll be released anytime soon. I wish I could

Wyoming, Michigan Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
October 24, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I don't have any information if that's true. I think it would be a mistake to build up expectations like that, because we have no idea what the Iranians are going to demand, whether or not we can accept their demands, or if they'll even make any demands. I think it's just a mistake for us to assume that the hostages will be released


Presidential Debate in Cleveland
October 28, 1980
THE PRESIDENT. We will maintain our position of neutrality in the Iran and Iraq war. We have no plans to sell additional materiel or goods to Iran that might be of a warlike nature. When I made my decision to stop all trade with Iran as a result of the taking of our hostages, I announced then and have consistently maintained since then that if the hostages are released safely, that we would make delivery on those items which Iran owns, which they have bought and paid for-also, that the frozen Iranian assets would be released. That's been a consistent policy, one I intend to carry out



Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 29, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. I'm not sure. There's no way for me to know what the hostages know. 
When Richard Queen came home after he was released because he was ill, I had a private conversation with him and his mother and father and his brother in the Oval Office. And I didn't cross-examine him, but it was obvious to me that he had been misled by his captors and was convinced in a way that the American people had forgotten the hostages. 
Obviously, by the time he had a few days of rest in Germany and got here, we had sent State Department officials over to show him some newsreels and newspapers and thousands of letters and the heartbreak that existed among the American people of all kinds since the hostages were taken. 
But my guess is that the hostages have no idea how many prayers have gone up for them, how many yellow ribbons have been tied on trees, how many times the American news stories have been about them, and how our hearts have gone out to their families. I don't believe they know it. 
I don't have any way to predict when the hostages will come home. This has been a very difficult issue for me and for the American people; more difficult, obviously, for the hostages and their families. 
But we've had two basic principles that have guided me in everything I've done, and they haven't ever changed. One is that I as President should protect the honor and the integrity and the interest of my Nation, and secondly, and tied in with it, is that I should never do anything as a President that would endanger the lives or safety of the hostages or interfere with their earliest possible return to freedom and to their families. We've never deviated from those policies. The understanding that we now have with Iranian officials, with the United Nations, has been put forward to the public since last January or February. We've not changed. 
And my hope and prayer is that the Government which Iran finally has—a President, a Prime Minister, a parliament, a speaker of the parliament, a Cabinet-that they are approaching a time of making a decision about the hostages. 
I found out early this morning, 7 o'clock our time, that they had completed about a 4-hour closed debate this morning, and tomorrow they'll have their first open debate on the hostage issue. What that indicates I do not know. But all we can do is to continue to protect the interest of the hostages, protect the interest of our Nation, and pray that they'll be released. 
My guess is that when they are released, they would have a few days of rest and physical examination and proper diet, in Germany or some acceptable place, and then come home to the welcome that I hope they'll be prepared to receive. And at that time I have no doubt that they will know how much we love them.


Columbia, South Carolina Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting 
October 31, 1980

I'd like to point out to you that in recent years, we have not fared poorly in our contests with the Soviet Union. When the Soviets went into their neighboring nation, Afghanistan, this was not a triumph for communism, it was an indication of the failure of communism. If the Soviets' friendship and their form of government had been attractive to the Afghan people, the Soviets would not have had to send 80,000 troops into that small, freedom-loving country in order to try to impose their will on it. And there are now 900,000 people, at least, or more, who have left Afghanistan to escape to freedom, now living in Pakistan; several hundred thousand perhaps in Iran. The same thing's happened in Cuba. If Castro should open the doors of Cuba, the people would escape from totalitarian government to freedom. The same thing's happening in Cambodia


American Hostages in Iran Remarks on the Iranian Parliament's Decision Concerning the Hostages. 
November 2, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. The Iranian parliament today has finally taken a position on the release of our hostages. This is a significant development. We have long been aware that there would be no resolution of this problem until the new Iranian Government was in place and the Parliament had acted. 
Many months ago we made clear the steps that we would be prepared to take when the hostages are released. Ever since the American hostages were illegally seized in Iran, I have affirmed that our policy is based on two fundamental objectives: protecting the honor and the vitalinterests of the United States and working to ensure the earliest possible safe release of the hostages. As we understand the Parliament's proposals, they appear to offer a positive basis for achieving both of these objectives. We are pursuing the matter through diplomatic channels. Any action taken by our Government will be in full accordance with our laws and with our Constitution. 
I know that I share with the hostages, with their families, and with the people of this country the desire for a prompt return of those for whom we have waited so long. I know also that all Americans will want that return to be on a proper basis, which is worthy of the suffering and sacrifice which the hostages have endured. 
I wish that I could predict when the hostages will return. I cannot. But whether our hostages come home before or after the election, and regardless of the outcome of the election, the Iranian Government and the world community will find our country, its people, and the leaders of both political parties united in desiring the early and safe return of the hostages to their homes, but only on a basis that preserves our national honor and our national integrity.
Thank you very much. 
THE PRESIDENT. I think the comment I made expresses how I feel.


Plains, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters Alter Voting. 
November 4, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No. All of the information we had about the hostages has been steady, that they will be turned over by the militants to the Government, that Algeria will be an intermediary, may play a larger role. We've been in touch with the Algerians not only now, but for a long time. Even before the five United Nations members went to Iran, months ago, the Algerians were working very closely with us—Mr. Majawi was. We've had meetings in Washington with Ambassador Malek, who represents Algeria in our country. So, I think the Iranians couldn't have chosen a better intermediary than they did, in choosing the Algerians. 
THE PRESIDENT. NO. I talked to the State Department this morning about an hour before we came in to Warner-Robins. And we will exchange documents with them, probably through the Algerians. What we will propose will be to uphold our Nation's honor and integrity. It'll be made public at the proper time, and I think the American people will be pleased. 
THE PRESIDENT. I feel more encouraged about the hostages now than I have in the past, but the time schedule for their release is something I can't predict. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, obviously the last year, you know., the concern about the hostages, the frustrations that all Americans have felt, I think have obviously been a negative political factor. But we've acted properly. In retrospect, I see no way we could have done any differently, because I wanted to protect the lives and the safety of the hostages under every condition and also protect the honor of my country, and we've done both things. 


1980 Presidential Election Remarks With Reporters on the Results of the Election. 
November 5, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, it's hard to say. I think Khomeini's professed public animosity against the Shah and against me the last 12 months has been obvious, and that included his statements this weekend. But I don't have any way to know what the Ayatollah's goals were. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I think that we have a tendency over here to greatly exaggerate the importance of the American election in the minds of the Iranian people. Their Government is still in its embryonic stage. They're struggling for political power and authority. Their country is endangered with an armed invasion. Their life's blood economically, with oil and the Abadan refinery, have been lost. They are still isolated among the community of nations. And for us to exalt, you know, the outcome of an election here, when the facts are that policies won't be basically changed toward Iran and the hostages, into something important for the Iranians I think is just a mistake
On the image part, anyone who sits in this office would have to refer, without being repetitious, to the question that was asked earlier. There are international events—refugees, oil prices, the capturing of an Embassy in Iran—over which a President has no direct control, and the fact that we don't have control and our Nation is not able to dominate world affairs to suit our own inclinations reflects adversely on the image of a President


The Presidential Transition and Domestic and Foreign Policy Issues Remarks in a Question-and-Answer Session With Reporters. 
November 12, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Christopher reported a successful mission to me. He went there to relate to the Algerians our basic response to the Iranian proposals. The Algerians accepted the outline of response and have already relayed to the Iranians the response. So Christopher believes it was a successful mission. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. 
THE PRESIDENT. It's up to the Iranians. I think it would certainly be to their advantage and to ours to resolve this issue without any further delay. I think our answers are adequate, and I believe that the Iranian proposal was a basis for resolution of the differences. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. No, I think it's better not to get into any sort of specificity at all about our response
THE PRESIDENT. It's hard to say. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. I've had a timetable in mind for more than a year now, and it never has been reached. I can't predict. 


Plains, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
December 24, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. Well, I don't want to be overly optimistic. We've always been disappointed in dealing with the Iranians, as you know. But we'll continue to try to deal with the Iranians, as we have in the past, both protecting the honor of our country and also trying to do everything we can to protect the lives and safety of the hostages. 
We will not pay any ransom. We never have been willing to even consider that. What we have tried to do is to deal with the Iranians through the Algerians, notnegotiating directly, so that the possibility of restoring the situation as it was before the hostages were taken. But the prospects for their early release, I think, is unfortunately quite dim. 
THE PRESIDENT. Yes. We explained our position very clearly to the Iranians through the Algerians, and either they just ignored what we told them we could or would do or else they deliberately made demands that they knew we couldn't meet. 
THE PRESIDENT. When the revolution took place in Iran there were 50,000 Americans there, and ever since those early days when literally thousands of people in Iran have been killed, my deepest personal concern about human beings has been to keep Americans alive. We extracted all the Americans without loss of life. And of course, my concern the last 13 or 14 months has been the safety of the hostages and their well-being, and we'll continue to do everything we can to preserve both their safety and well-being. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, more than a year ago we let the Iranians know the consequences of any trial, and I don't think it's necessary for me to repeat that


American Hostages in Iran Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
December 31, 1980

THE PRESIDENT. No, I can't predict that. But we've made a reasonable proposal through the Algerians, and I think that it would be to the advantage of the Iranians and, certainly, to the advantage of our imperiled hostages, if they would accept what we have proposed. 
THE PRESIDENT. Any prediction of a favorable response from the Iranians has always been mistaken, but I hope they will go ahead and resolve this. 
THE PRESIDENT. Wait and see


American Hostages in Iran Informal Exchange With Reporters. 
January 8, 1981

THE PRESIDENT. I don't want to raise any unwarranted expectations, Helen [Helen Thomas, United Press International]. Every time we've had a favorable response from the Iranians, later on we've been disappointed. 
I sent the Deputy Secretary of State over to Algeria last night to make our own positions clear. I believe it's a proposal that would be acceptable to the American people as fair and also to the Iranians as being fair. 
I hope that we can resolve it before I go out of office, but I can't predict that that will happen. 
THE PRESIDENT. Well, obviously the time is getting close, but we'll continue to do our best until the last moment I'm in office. I hope we can be successful, but I can't predict that




Plains, Georgia Informal Exchange With Reporters on Arrival. 
January 8, 1981
THE PRESIDENT. Well, Secretary Christopher always carries out his missions successfully, but what the response will be we don't know. He'll certainly do what I've assigned him to do. As a matter of fact, I've already got one report from him this morning on the plane coming back. But we don't know what the Iranian reaction is. 
As I said earlier, I think the proposals that have been exchanged through the Algerians are reasonable and a foundation for resolving the differences between us, but I can't predict success. I think that would be a mistake. 
THE PRESIDENT. No. 


American Hostages in Iran Informal Exchange With Reporter:. 
January 12, 1981

THE PRESIDENT. It looks better, but I can't predict success. 
THE PRESIDENT. That depends on them. We've made them a reasonable proposition



Farewell Address to the Nation
January 14, 1981

During the next few days I will work hard to make sure that the transition from myself to the next President is a good one, that the American people are served well. And I will continue, as I have the last 14 months, to work hard and to pray for the lives and the well-being of the American hostages held in Iran. I can't predict yet what will happen, but I hope you will join me in my constant prayer for their freedom


Remarks Announcing United States-Iran Agreement for Release of the Hostages
January 19, 1981

We have now reached an agreement with Iran which will result, I believe, in the freedom of our American hostages. The last documents have now been signed in Algiers, following the signing of the documents in Iran which will result in this agreement. We still have a few documents to sign before the money is actually transferred and the hostages are released. 
The essence of the agreement is that following the release of our hostages, then we will unfreeze and transfer to the Iranians a major part of the assets which were frozen by me when the Iranians seized our Embassy compound and took our hostages. We have also reached complete agreement on the arbitration procedures between ourselves and Iran with the help of the Algerians which will resolve the claims that exist between residents of our Nation and Iran and vice-versa. 
I particularly want to express my public thanks, as I have already done privately, to the Algerians, to. their President, their Foreign Minister, Ben Yahia, and to the three-man negotiating teams who have done such a superb job in fair and equitable arbitration between ourselves and the officials of Iran. We don't yet know exactly how fast this procedure will go. We are prepared to move as rapidly as possible. All the preparations have been completed pending the final documents being signed. 
I will have more to say to you when our American hostages are actually free. In the meantime, Jody Powell will stay in close touch with developments. Working with the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Treasury, my legal counsel, Lloyd Cutler, I'm talking frequently to Warren Christopher in Algiers. And Jody Powell will keep you informed about developments.
Thank you very much. 
THE PRESIDENT. I'll wait until the hostages are released, and then I'll have another statement to make. 

Toast at the Inaugural Luncheon 
January 20, 1981

And now, to conclude the toast, with thanks to Almighty God, I have been given a tag-line, the get-off line that everyone wants for the end of a toast or a speech or anything else. Some 30 minutes ago, the planes bearing our prisoners left Iranian airspace and are now free of Iran


Exchange With Reporters on the Release of the American Hostages in Iran 
January 20, 1981

When we were watching the parade-well, at first, at lunch I learned that both planes had taken off and were in the air. And then I learned here, while we were watching the parade, that they had crossed the border and were out of Iranian airspace. And the next word I got, before the parade was over, was that they were refueling in Athens. The flight from there to Algiers is about 2 1/2 hours



