MID 455201, Pakistan

Remarks at a White House Reception for Veterans
November 11, 2002
Justice has been brought to terrorists in countries from Spain to the Philippines to Pakistan to Indonesia, and we're still on the hunt. Sometimes you'll see successes, and sometimes you won't. But one thing is certain, an enemy that conspires in the shadows will not be safe in the shadows. Terrorists who plot to kill Americans and our friends should know this: No matter how long it takes, their day of justice will come.

Remarks on the Celebration of Eid al-Fitr
December 5, 2002
During Eid al-Fitr, Muslims celebrate the completion of their fast and the blessings of renewed faith that have come with it. Customs vary between countries, from illuminating lanterns in Egypt to lighting firecrackers in Pakistan, to inviting elders to traditional feasts in Niger. Around the world, families and neighbors and friends gather to share traditional foods and congratulate each other on meeting the test of Ramadan.

Remarks to the American Medical Association National Conference
March 4, 2003
Over the weekend, American and Pakistani authorities struck a serious blow to Al Qaida by arresting Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the top operational planner, the top killer of the Al Qaida network. The man who masterminded the September the 11th attacks is no longer a problem to the United States of America.

The President's News Conference
March 6, 2003
This has been an important week on two fronts on our war against terror. First, thanks to the hard work of American and Pakistani officials, we captured the mastermind of the September the 11th attacks against our Nation. Khalid Sheikh Mohammed conceived and planned the hijackings and directed the actions of the hijackers. We believe his capture will further disrupt the terror network and their planning for additional attacks.

The President's Radio Address
March 8, 2003
Good morning. This has been an important week on two fronts of our war against terror. First, American and Pakistani authorities captured the mastermind of the September the 11th attacks against our country, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. This is a landmark achievement in disrupting the Al Qaida network, and we believe it will help us prevent future acts of terror. We are currently working with over 90 countries and have dealt with over 3,000 terrorists who have been detained, arrested, or otherwise will not be a problem for the United States.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia and an Exchange With Reporters
April 30, 2003
And finally, Mr. President, you're here on a day in which our country has achieved another notable success in the war against terror. The Pakistan authorities have detained Waleed bin Attash. He's a killer. He was one of the top Al Qaida operatives, and he was right below Khalid Sheikh Mohammed on the organizational chart of Al Qaida. He is one less person that people who love freedom have to worry about. 
I want to thank our friends in Pakistan. I want to thank the Agency, the CIA, for working hard to continue to win the war against terror. And make no mistake about it, Mr. President, we will win the war against terror. 

Address to the Nation on Iraq From the U.S.S. Abraham Lincoln 
May 1, 2003
From Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa, we are hunting down Al Qaida killers. Nineteen months ago, I pledged that the terrorists would not escape the patient justice of the United States. And as of tonight, nearly one-half of Al Qaida's senior operatives have been captured or killed.

The President's Radio Address
May 17, 2003
The enemies of freedom are not idle, and neither are we. Our Government is taking unprecedented measures to defend the homeland. And from Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa, we are hunting down Al Qaida killers. So far, nearly one-half of Al Qaida's senior operatives have been captured or killed. And we will remain on the hunt until they are all brought to justice.

The President's News Conference With President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan at Camp David, Maryland
June 24, 2003
President Musharraf is a courageous leader and a friend of the United States. America has a strong relationship with Pakistan, and we have benefited from the industry and the talents of Pakistani Americans. 
Today, our two nations are working together closely on common challenges. Both the United States and Pakistan are threatened by global terror, and we're determined to defeat it. Pakistan's support was essential in our campaign against the Taliban. 
Since September the 11th attacks, Pakistan has apprehended more than 500 Al Qaida and Taliban terrorists, thanks to the effective border security measures and law enforcement cooperation throughout the country, and thanks to the leadership of President Musharraf. 
Today, both our countries are working with the Afghan Government to build a stable, democratic Afghanistan with secure border regions that are free from terror and free from extremism. Pakistan and the United States also share a determination to bring the security—the benefits of security and freedom to the people of Iraq. And I look forward to working with President Musharraf on this critical goal. 
The friendship between the United States and Pakistan is vital to the security and stability of South Asia. I'm encouraged by the progress President Musharraf and Indian Prime Minister Vajpayee may have made in easing tensions between Pakistan and India. I'm hopeful that the two countries will deepen their engagement on all issues, including Kashmir. 
In our meeting, we discussed the need to address extremism and cross-border infiltration, and I assured the President that the United States will do all we can to promote peace. President Musharraf has set out on an important mission. He's working to build a modern Pakistan that is tolerant and prosperous. Achieving this vision of moderation and progress will require movement toward democracy in Pakistan. The United States currently provides over $31 million for initiatives in Pakistan aimed at broadening political participation and expanding educational opportunities, especially for women and girls. 
Greater economic development is also critical to fulfilling the hopes of the Pakistani people. Since we met last year, the United States has canceled $1 billion of debt Pakistan owed our country. And today I'm pleased to announce that our nations are signing a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement, which creates a formal structure for expanding our economic partnership. In addition, I will work with the United States Congress on a $3-billion assistance package to help advance security and economic opportunity for Pakistan's citizens. 
For more than 50 years, the United States and Pakistan have worked together for the security and prosperity of South Asia. Today we reaffirm a friendship that has brought great benefits to our people. 
President Bush. Well, let me start off. There's more than two principals at large. There are terrorists who are—still have designs on destabilizing the Pakistan Government and are destroying innocent life. You've named two. There are others around too, and we're just on the hunt. And we'll find them. It's a matter of time. 
Thanks to President Musharraf's leadership, on the Al Qaida front we've dismantled the chief operators of Al Qaida. If Usama bin Laden is alive—and the President can comment on that if he cares to— but the people reporting to him, the chief operators, people like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, are no longer a threat to the United States or Pakistan for that matter. 
As I said in my opening remarks, thanks to the leadership of this man and his Government, over 500 Al Qaida and Taliban terrorists are detained. They're no longer a problem. So slowly but surely, we're dismantling the networks, and we'll continue on the hunt. It doesn't matter how long it takes. It could take a day, or it could take a month. It could take years. It doesn't matter how long it takes, Mr. President, we will stay on the hunt, and we want to thank you for your cooperation. 
President Bush. I think—look, we've spent a lot of time on this subject, not only today but during previous meetings. I assured President Musharraf that the United States wants to help toward achieving a peaceful solution. What you've just described is the reason why there needs to be a peaceful solution on this issue and other issues. Our role will be to be a— to aid the process forward. The decision-makers will be the Pakistani Government and the Indian Government. Those are the Governments that have to decide how to resolve this issue, which is a—which has been a thorn in both people's sides. 
One thing is for certain, that we all must work together to fight off terrorists who would like to prevent a peaceful solution. There needs to be a 100-percent effort on all parties' side; every party involved with this issue must focus on notallowing a few to undermine the hopes of many. And the President knows that I will remain engaged. I have—stand by, ready to help. But the truth of the matter is, for there to be a final agreement, it's going to require leadership from both the Pakistani Government and the Indian Government. 
President Bush. Well, the President and I talked about the reforms that he's putting in place and the democracy to which he is committed. One of the things that he has done that is most impressive for the long-term stability of Pakistan is to address education reform. A good education system is one that is going to mean more likely for any country, including ourselves, to be a freer country and a more democratic country. 
And he is taking on the issue in a way that is visionary and strong. He's dealing with the Madrassahs in a way that is productive and constructive. He is working on a national curriculum that will focus on basic education. I'll let him describe his vision. But this country is committed to democracy, and we're committed to freedom. We're also committed to working with our partner to fight off the influences of terrorism. And we've had no better partner in our fight on terror than President Musharraf. 
President Bush. No, I know. [Laughter] Let me just say—first, let me say, the President is not afraid to bring up the issue of F-16s. He has been a strong advocate for the sale of F-16s to Pakistan. In the package that we discussed, the 5-year, $3-billion package, half of that money goes for defense matters, of which the F-16 won't be a part. Nevertheless, we want to work closely with our friend to make sure that the package meets the needs of the Pakistan people.

Remarks at a Reenlistment Ceremony on the 30th Anniversary of the All-Volunteer Force
July 1, 2003
At this moment, American and allied forces continue the work of fighting terrorists and establishing order in Afghanistan. When we removed the Taliban from power, surviving Al Qaida members fled from most of that country. However, many terrorists sought sanctuary along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, and some are still hiding there. These Al Qaida and Taliban holdouts have attacked allied bases with unguided rockets, conducted ambushes, and fired upon border posts. In close cooperation with the Afghan and Pakistani Governments, America is engaged in operations to find and destroy these terrorists. 
Since the beginning of Operation Enduring Freedom, it is important for our fellow citizens to know that Pakistan has apprehended more than 500 terrorists, including hundreds of members of Al Qaida and the Taliban. 
Afghanistan still has many challenges, but that country is making progress, and its people are a world away from the nightmare they endured under the Taliban. Pakistan and Afghanistan are among many governments that understand the threat of terror and are determined to root it out. 

Remarks at the Marine Corps Air Station in Miramar, California
August 14, 2003
Our Nation is waging a broad and unrelenting campaign against the global terror network, and we're winning. Wherever Al Qaida terrorists try to hide—from the caves and mountains of central Asia to the islands of the Philippines to the cities in Pakistan— we are finding them, and we are bringing them to justice

Remarks at the American Legion National Convention in St. Louis, Missouri
August 26, 2003
The Al Qaida terrorists lost a base in Afghanistan, but they operate in many other places. We're on their trail, from Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa. Earlier this month, we captured a major terrorist named Hambali. He's a known killer and was a close associate of September the 11th mastermind Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. Hambali was one of the world's most lethal terrorists and is suspected of planning the attack on Bali and other recent acts of terror. We're making steady progress. Nearly two-thirds of known senior Al Qaida leaders, operational managers, and key facilitators have either been captured or killed.

Remarks to Military Personnel and Families at Fort Stewart, Georgia
September 12, 2003
The President. Since we last met, soldiers of the 3d Infantry Division have fought in Afghanistan and have hunted terrorists in Pakistan; you've launched the coalition offensive into Iraq, defeated the enemy in Najaf; you took the Saddam Hussein International Airport and seized his palaces; and you led the fighting into Baghdad the day the statue of the dictator was pulled down.
We are hunting the Al Qaida terrorists wherever they still hide, from Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa. And we're making good progress. Nearly two-thirds of Al Qaida's known leaders have been captured or killed. The rest of them are dangerous, but the rest of them can be certain we're on their trail. Ourresolve is firm. The resolve of this Nation is clear: No matter how long it takes, we will bring justice to those who plot against America.

Remarks Prior to Discussions With Prime Minister Mir Zafarullah Khan Jamali of Pakistan
October 1, 2003
There's a lot of Pakistani Americans who are pleased you are here today, sir. And on their behalf, I welcome you to the Oval Office. And it gives me a chance to say publicly how much we appreciate the friendship of Pakistan.

Remarks at Pease Air National Guard Base in Portsmouth, New Hampshire
October 9, 2003
Yet wars are won on the offensive, and our friends and America are staying on the offensive. We're finding them. We're on the hunt. We're rolling back the terrorist threats, not on the fringes of its influence but at the heart of its power. We're making good progress. We're hunting the Al Qaida terrorists wherever they hide, from Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa to Iraq. Nearly two-thirds of Al Qaida's known leaders have been captured or killed. Ourresolve is firm; ourresolve is clear: No matter how long it takes, all who plot against America will face the justice of America.
I am confident of victory because I know the character of our military, shown in people like Master Sergeant Jack Negrotti of Plaistow, New Hampshire. Jake is a member of the New Hampshire Air National Guard who's volunteered for overseas deployments 3 times since September the 11th. He served in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iraq. Right now Jake is an airport manager at Baghdad Airport, helping make sure our military and humanitarian operations move ahead.

Remarks to the Greater Manchester Chamber of Commerce in Manchester, New Hampshire
October 9, 2003
We are rolling back the terrorist threat, not on the fringes of its influence but at the heart of its power. We're making good progress. We're hunting the Al Qaida terrorists and their allies wherever they hide, from Pakistan to the Philippines to the Horn of Africa to Iraq. Nearly two-thirds of Al Qaida's known leaders have been captured or killed. Ourresolve is firm and clear: No matter how long it takes, all who plot against America will face the justice of America.

Remarks Following a Roundtable Discussion in Dinuba, California
October 15, 2003
We've taken unprecedented steps to protect this homeland. We have a solemn duty to do so. Yet wars are won on the offensive, and America and our friends will stay on the offensive. We're hunting down the Al Qaida wherever they hide, whether it be from Pakistan or Iraq or the Philippines or the Horn of Africa. And we're making good progress. Nearly two-thirds of Al Qaida's known leaders have been captured or killed.

Interview With Sir David Frost of BBC Television
November 12, 2003
The President. Well, see, I can understand their concerns, except they forgot the history. This issue has been discussed in the United Nations for over a decade. And the United Nations, as a multilateral international body, passed resolution after resolution after resolution calling for Saddam Hussein to disarm. In other words, the diplomatic process went forward. There was plenty of diplomacy. And to the critics, I would say that there will be diplomacy when it comes to India and Pakistan. The world will speak out clearly.

Remarks on New Year's Day and an Exchange With Reporters in Falfurrias, Texas
January 1, 2004
The President. Well, I appreciated talking to President Musharraf. I told him how much I was hopeful that he continued to join us in the war on terror. Obviously, terrorists are after him. And he sounded very confident that his security forces would be able to deal with the threat. 
President Musharraf has been a friend of the United States. He's been a standup guy when it comes to dealing with the terrorists. We are making progress against the Al Qaida because of his cooperation. We need to do more, particularly on the Pakistan-Afghan border. He sounded confident, and therefore I feel confident about his security situation. 
The President. Yes, they are secure. He is—and that's important. It's also important that India as well have a secure nuclear weapons program. 
We're hopeful that the Indians and the Pakistanis in upcoming meetings will be able to begin a dialog on a variety of issues. It looks like they're making progress toward reconciling differences. Slowly but surely, positive things are taking place, and I commend the leaders of both countries for taking steps toward a peaceful reconciliation of major issues that have divided them. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 20, 2004
America is on the offensive against the terrorists who started this war. Last March, Khalid Sheik Mohammed, a mastermind of September the 11th, awoke to find himself in the custody of U.S. and Pakistani authorities. Last August the 11th brought the capture of the terrorist Hambali, who was a key player in the attack in Indonesia that killed over 200 people. We're tracking Al Qaida around the world, and nearly two-thirds of their known leaders have now been captured or killed. Thousands of very skilled and determined military personnel are on the manhunt, going after the remaining killers who hide in cities and caves, and one by one, we will bring these terrorists to justice.

Interview With Mouafac Harb of the Middle East Television Network
January 29, 2004
Pakistan is another country which is evolving, showing what is possible in terms of a free society and an active Parliament and, at the same time, honoring Islam.

Remarks Following Discussions With Secretary-General Kofi Annan of the United Nations
February 3, 2004
President Bush. It's my honor to welcome the Secretary-General here to the Oval Office. We've just had a really constructive dialog about a lot of issues. And the world is changing for the better, and the United Nations is playing a vital role in that change. And we talked about Iraq and Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, the Middle East, the continent of Africa. And I'll let the Secretary-General speak for himself, but I'm upbeat and optimistic about the future of the world

Remarks at the National Defense University
February 11, 2004
A.Q. Khan is known throughout the world as the father of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program. What was not publicly known until recently is that he also led an extensive international network for the proliferation of nuclear technology and know-how. For decades, Mr. Khan remained on the Pakistani Government payroll, earning a modest salary. Yet, he and his associates financed lavish lifestyles through the sale of nuclear technologies and equipment to outlaw regimes stretching from North Africa to the Korean Peninsula. 
A.Q. Khan, himself, operated mostly out of Pakistan. He served as director of the network, its leading scientific mind as well as its primary salesman. Over the past decade, he made frequent trips to consult with his clients and to sell his expertise. He and his associates sold the blueprints for centrifuges to enrich uranium as well as nuclear designs stolen from the Pakistani Government. The network sold uranium hexafluoride, the gas that the centrifuge process can transform into enriched uranium for nuclear bombs. Khan and his associates provided Iran and Libya and North Korea with designs for Pakistan's older centrifuges as well as designs for more advanced and efficient models. The network also provided these countries with components and, in some cases, with complete centrifuges. 
Khan's deputy, a man named B.S.A. Tahir, ran SMB Computers, a business in Dubai. Tahir used that computer company as a front for the proliferation activities of the A.Q. Khan network. Tahir acted as both the network's chief financial officer and money launderer. He was also its shipping agent, using his computer firm as cover for the movement of centrifuge parts to various clients. Tahir directed the Malaysia facility to produce these parts based on Pakistani designs and then ordered the facility to ship the components to Dubai. Tahir also arranged for parts acquired by other European procurement agents to transit through Dubai for shipment to other customers. 
Governments around the world worked closely with us to unravel the Khan network and to put an end to his criminal enterprise. A.Q. Khan has confessed his crimes, and his top associates are out of business. The Government of Pakistan is interrogating the network's members, learning critical details that will help them prevent it from ever operating again. President Musharraf has promised to share all the information he learns about the Khan network and has assured us that his country will never again be a source of proliferation. 

The President's Radio Address
February 14, 2004
We are aggressively pursuing another dangerous source of proliferation, black-market operatives who sell equipment and expertise related to weapons of mass destruction. The world recently learned of the network led by A.Q. Khan, the former head of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program. Khan and his associates sold nuclear technology and know-how to rogue regimes around the world, such as Iran and North Korea. Thanks to the tireless work of intelligence officers from the United States and the United Kingdom and other nations, the Khan network is being dismantled.

Remarks on the Anniversary of Operation Iraqi Freedom
March 19, 2004
The murders in Madrid are a reminder that the civilized world is at war, and in this new kind of war, civilians find themselves suddenly on the frontlines. In recent years, terrorists have struck from Spain to Russia, to Israel, to East Africa, to Morocco, to the Philippines, and to America. They've targeted Arab States such as Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Yemen. They have attacked Muslims in Indonesia, Turkey, Pakistan, Iraq, and Afghanistan. No nation or region is exempt from the terrorists' campaign of violence.
We are using every tool of finance, intelligence, law enforcement, and military power to break terror networks, to deny them refuge, and to find their leaders. Over the past 30 months, we have frozen or seized nearly $200 million in assets of terror networks. We have captured or killed some two-thirds of Al Qaida's known leaders as well as many of Al Qaida's associates in countries like the United States or Germany or Pakistan or Saudi Arabia or Thailand. We are taking the fight to Al Qaida allies, such as Ansar Al-Islam in Iraq, Jemaah Islamiyah in Indonesia and Southeast Asia. Our coalition is sending an unmistakable message to the terrorists, including those who struck in Madrid: These killers will be tracked down and found; they will face their day of justice.

The President's News Conference
April 13, 2004
Over the last several decades, we've seen that any concession or retreat on our part will only embolden this enemy and invite more bloodshed. And the enemy has seen, over the last 31 months, that we will no longer live in denial or seek to appease them. For the first time, the civilized world has provided a concerted response to the ideology of terror, a series of powerful, effective blows. The terrorists have lost the shelter of the Taliban and the training camps in Afghanistan. They've lost safe havens in Pakistan. They lost an ally in Baghdad, and Libya has turned its back on terror. They've lost many leaders in an unrelenting international manhunt. And perhaps most frightening to these men and their movement, the terrorists are seeing the advance of freedom and reform in the greater Middle East.
It would have been awfully hard to do as well, by the way. We would have had to—we hadn't got our relationship right with Pakistan yet. The Caucus area would have been very difficult from which to base.It just seemed an impractical strategy at the time, and frankly, I didn't contemplate it.

Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the Newspaper Association of America Convention
April 21, 2004
Part of understanding North Korea better was a great success by our team and the Brits in unraveling the A.Q. Khan network. A.Q. Khan was a nuclear scientist in Pakistan that was willing to sell state secrets in order to make money. It's real dangerous, by the way, when you have somebody who is willing to sell information purely for money, because you don't know where that information might end up. And the ambitions of the terrorist network, of course, would be to have the ultimate weapons at their disposal in order to blackmail and/or to harm.
Pakistan, we're getting good cooperation. Just think about what life was like prior to September the 11th in Pakistan. Pakistan was friendly to the Taliban. And fortunately, our Government, thanks to the good work of Colin Powell, convinced President Musharraf that that was not in his interests. His interests were to be working with us and fighting off the terror. Of course, since then Al Qaida has tried to kill him twice. I think it confirms the fact that he's chosen the right side. We're trying to help him. And he's active in the war on terror. And he is—but he's got issues, just like any of these countries have got issues. But he's done—in my judgment, he's been a good, strong ally. 
And I'm pleased with the fact that progress is now being made on the relationship between Pakistan and India. I don't know if you remember, I think it was in the year '01—I don't see many foreign policy kind of reporters here, but '01 was the year that we had shuttle diplomacy to convince Pakistan and India not to go to war with each other. Powell went, and then Straw went from Great Britain, and then Armitage went, and then whoever his equivalent is from Great Britain went, with the idea of kind of talking everybody down. And now, it's quite the opposite; they're talking with each other in a positive way and hopefully can get some sticky issues resolved, for the sake of world peace and stability in that part of the world. I think progress is being made. But we can always—we will always find ways to improve our alliances. 

Commencement Address at the United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colorado
June 2, 2004
And since September the 11th, we've seen terrorist violence in an arc from Morocco to Spain to Turkey to Russia to Uzbekistan to Pakistan to India to Thailand to Indonesia. Yet the center of the conflict, the platform for their global expansion, the region they seek to remake in their image is the broader Middle East.
Terrorists find their ultimate support and sanctuary when they gain control of governments and countries. We saw the terrible harm that terrorists did by taking effective control over the Government of Afghanistan, a terrorist victory that led directly to the attacks of September the 11th. And terrorists have similar designs on Iraq, on Pakistan, on Saudi Arabia, and many other regional governments they regard as illegitimate. We can only imagine the scale of terrorist crimes were they to gain control of states with weapons of mass murder or vast oil revenues. So we will not retreat. We will prevent the emergence of terrorist-controlled states.

Interview With Radio and Television Ireland
June 24, 2004
On September the 11th, 2001, we were attacked in an unprovoked fashion. Everybody thought the world was calm, and then there have been bombings since then—not because of my response to Iraq. There were bombings in Madrid. There were bombings in Istanbul. There were bombings in Bali. There were killings in Pakistan
The President. Well, I think, first of all, you've got a democracy in Turkey. And you've got a democracy emerging in Afghanistan. You've got a democracy in Pakistan. In other words——

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom in Istanbul
June 28, 2004
And if you really think about what's happened since September the 11th, there's been some amazing progress. Pakistan has now joined the battle against Al Qaida. President Musharraf has made a concerted decision to go after Al Qaida, which hides in remote regions of his country on the Afghanistan border. Libya has declared and produced its weapons programs that we're now destroying. You know, Turkey is solid. There's a solid democracy here in the broader Middle East which is a great example.

Remarks at Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Oak Ridge, Tennessee
July 12, 2004
Three years ago, Pakistan was one of the few countries in the world that recognized the Taliban regime. Al Qaida was active and recruiting in Pakistan and was not seriously opposed. Pakistan served as a transit point for Al Qaida terrorists leaving Afghanistan on missions of murder. Yet the United States was not on good terms with Pakistan's military and civilian leaders, the very people we would need to help shut down Al Qaida operations in that part of the world. 
Today, the Governments of the United States and Pakistan are working closely in the fight against terror. President Musharraf is a friend of our country who helped us capture Khalid Sheik Mohammed, the operational planner behind the September the 11th attacks. And Pakistani forces are rounding up terrorists along their nation's western border. Today, because we're working with the Pakistani leaders, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror and the American people are safer. 
Three years ago, a private weapons proliferation network was doing business around the world. This network, operated by the Pakistani nuclear scientist A.Q. Khan, was selling nuclear plans and equipment to the highest bidder and found willing buyers in places like Libya, Iran, and North Korea. Today, the A.Q. Khan network is out of business. We have ended one of the most dangerous sources of proliferation in the world, and the American people are safer

Remarks in Duluth, Minnesota
July 13, 2004
The world is changing because of our leadership. Three years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Now the terror camps are closed, and democracy is rising, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now Pakistani forces are rounding up the terrorists. They're joining us in the war on terror, and the American people are safer. Three years ago in Saudi Arabia, the terrorists were finding little opposition. Now the Saudi Government is taking the fight to Al Qaida, and America is safer for it. Three years ago, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment, and the American people are safer for it.

Remarks in Marquette, Michigan
July 13, 2004
The world is changing for the better because of American leadership. America is safer today because we're leading the world. Afghanistan was once the home base of Al Qaida. Now terror camps are closed, democracy on the rising, and the American people are safer. Pakistan used to be a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now Pakistani forces are rounding up terrorists, and the American people are safer. In Saudi Arabia, terrorists were meeting little opposition. And today, the Saudi Government is taking the fight to Al Qaida, and the American people are safer. Not long ago, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed; Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment; and the American people are safer. Not long ago, the dictator in Iraq had the capability of producing weapons of mass murder. And now, the dictator is a threat to nobody, and the American people are safer.

Remarks in Waukesha, Wisconsin
July 14, 2004
The world is changing for the better because of American leadership. Three years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Now, the terror camps are closed, democracy is rising, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now, we're working with the Pakistani Government to find those killers in remote regions of that country, and America is safer. Three years ago, Saudi— in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were not challenged by that Government. Today, we're working with the Saudi Government, and the Saudi Government is running down Al Qaida leadership, and America is safer. Three years ago, Libya was spending millions of dollars to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libyan chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up its nuclear processing equipment, and America is safer. No, the world is changing for the better. Three years ago, the dictator in Iraq was a threat. He was a threat to us. He was a threat to the free world. He was a threat to the people in the neighborhood, and he was a threat to his own people. That dictator is no longer a threat, and the American people are safer.

Remarks in a Discussion at Mid-States Aluminum Corporation in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin
July 14, 2004
Just a couple of other points I want to make to you about how this administration is leading the world to make it a safer place for all of us. Pakistan was a place where terrorists could—where they had— Pakistan was the only country, by the way, that recognized the Taliban at the time, and Al Qaida could move freely throughout Pakistan. This is 3 years ago. Today, the Pakistan Government is determined to rout out Al Qaida out of their country. We've got an ally in the war on terror in Pakistan.
The President. Thank you for bringing that up. I tell you, if I knew, I wouldn't tell you. [Laughter] I'd be telling our forces which are stationed over there. He's on the run. He is, best guess, in the remote regions of Pakistan or Afghanistan, up there in kind of the—in the mountainous regions there, best guess. I really don't know. 
I do know that the organization is—got the ability to kind of exist without his physical presence. In other words, there's command—there's commanders that are able to rise up even though we may capture a previous commander. Khalid Sheik Mohammed no longer is—somebody took his place. They tend to be decentralized at times. This guy, Zarqawi, operating out of Iraq, we call him an affiliate of Al Qaida. We're not sure he has sworn allegiance to Al Qaida, but he gets instructions from Al Qaida. They deal with Al Qaida. We've intercepted an e-mail, as you might remember, of Zarqawi to Al Qaida types in remote parts of Pakistan—I think it's where the e-mail came from. At any rate, it talked about how Zarqawi was to incite Shi'a-Sunni violence in Iraq so that a civil war would stop the advance of freedom. In other words, there was a dialog between the two. 
Let me also remind you, however, that the CIA has had some great successes. Let me tell you one right quick, because I want the CIA agents who work for America to understand how much I appreciate their sacrifice and service and dedication. A.Q. Khan was a citizen of Pakistan who was a prominent scientist. A.Q. Khan went in the business of selling secret nuclear information, know-how, processing, to countries like Libya, Iran, and North Korea, and we caught him. And we penetrated his network—we—these are brave citizens of the United States—penetrated his network and exposed it to the world. And one of the great proliferators of weapon of mass destruction technology is no longer a threat to the United States and the free world. We've got some really good people working hard for the American people.

Remarks in Ashwaubenon, Wisconsin
July 14, 2004
America is leading the world, and the world is changing because of our leadership. Just 3 years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. And now, there's a democracy rising in that troubled part of the world, and America is safer for it. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder and terror. Now, the Pakistan Government has joined us in the war on terror, and Pakistan forces are rounding up the terrorists, and America is safer for it. Three years ago, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists found little opposition. Now, the Saudi Government has joined the war on terror, and they're bringing to justice Al Qaida terrorists, and America is safer for it. Three years ago, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment, and the American people are safer for it. The world is changing for the better. Three years ago, the dictator in Iraq had the capability of producing weapons of mass murder. And now, that dictator faces justice, and the American people are safer for it.

Remarks in Beckley, West Virginia
July 16, 2004
America is leading the world. We're leading the world, and the world is changing for the better. Three years ago, Afghanistan was home to Al Qaida. Now, the terror camps are closed, democracy is rising, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now, the Pakistan Government is committed to bringing Al Qaida to justice, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Saudi Arabia—in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were moving with little opposition. Now, the Saudi Government is taking the fight to Al Qaida, and the American people are safer for it. Three years ago, there was a proliferation network run by A.Q. Khan. The CIA discovered the plot. We have disrupted it and dismantled the organization, and the American people are safer for it. Three years ago—just 3 years ago—Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment, and the American people are safer for it.

Remarks in St. Charles, Missouri
July 20, 2004
America is leading the world, and the world is changing because of our leadership. Three years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Now, the camps are closed; democracy is rising; and the American people are safer. Three years ago, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists on missions of murder. Now, Pakistan forces are rounding up the terrorists. Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror, and the American people are safer. Three years ago, in Saudi Arabia, terrorists were moving with little opposition. Now, the Saudi Government has taken the fight to Al Qaida, and Americans are safer for it. Three years ago, Libya was spending millions to acquire weapons of mass destruction. Now, thousands of Libya's chemical munitions have been destroyed. Libya has given up nuclear processing equipment, and the American people are safer for it. 
Three years ago, there was a network run by a Pakistan nuclear scientist named A.Q. Khan that was selling secrets, nuclear secrets to countries like Iran and North Korea and Libya. Thanks to the hard work of CIA agents, thanks to cooperation between the British and United States Government, that network has been dismantled. It is no longer a problem, and America is safer for it. 

Remarks in a Discussion at Kirkwood Community College in Cedar Rapids, Iowa 
July 20, 2004
Three years ago, Pakistan recognized the Taliban, and Al Qaida was able to transit their country without worry. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror. They're chasing down Al Qaida leadership in the remote regions of that country, and America is safer for it. Three years ago, Saudi Arabia wasn't that worried about Al Qaida. Today, Saudi Arabia is chasing down the Al Qaida leadership. They are bringing them to justice. America is safer for it. Three years ago—3 years ago, Libya— Libya was a friend of the terrorists. Libya had weapons of mass destruction programs. Libya was a danger. Today, Libya has dismantled her programs, and America is safer for it. In three short years, because America has led with friends and allies, the world is changing for the better. The world is becoming a more free place, and therefore, the world is becoming a more peaceful place.

Remarks at the President's Dinner
July 21, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up terrorists; they're an ally in the war on terror. America and the world is safer.

Remarks in Grand Rapids, Michigan
July 30, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists. They're an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer

Remarks in Springfield, Missouri
July 30, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Cambridge, Ohio
July 31, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, they're an ally in the war on terror. Their forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world is safer.

Remarks in Canton, Ohio
July 31, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up terrorists, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
July 31, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit place for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war against terror. Pakistan forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Mankato, Minnesota
August 4, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war against Al Qaida. Pakistani forces are helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Davenport, Iowa
August 4, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists. America and the world are safer.

Remarks in a Discussion in Columbus, Ohio
August 5, 2004
We've taken the lead in the world, and the world has changed for the better. Just think about Afghanistan's neighbor, Pakistan, for a minute. Because of our leadership and work with the Pakistan authorities, Al Qaida is now on the run in Pakistan. We've got an ally in the war on terror with President Musharraf. No, this world is getting better off

Remarks in Saginaw, Michigan
August 5, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war against terror. Pakistani troops are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Stratham, New Hampshire
August 6, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war against terror. Pakistani forces are aggressively to—helping round up Al Qaida and their friends and associates, and America and the world are safer.

The President's Radio Address
August 7, 2004
I agree with the conclusion of the 9/ 11 Commission. Because of these steps at home and abroad, our country is safer than it was on September the 11th, 2001. Yet, we're still not safe. The elevation of the threat level in New York, New Jersey, and Washington, DC, is a grim reminder of the dangers we continue to face. Information from arrests in Pakistan, taken together with information gathered by the U.S. intelligence community, indicated that Al Qaida has cased financial targets in New York, New Jersey, and Washington, DC, and has recently updated their targeting information. This information was buttressed by other information we already had.

Remarks in Panama City, Florida
August 10, 2004
Prior to September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Pensacola, Florida
August 10, 2004
Because we acted, America and the world are safer. Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistani forces are aggressively helping to round up the terrorists. Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Phoenix, Arizona
August 11, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia weren't joining us in the war on terror. Today they are. Today, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are allies in the war on terror. They're after Al Qaida. America and the world are safer.

Remarks at a Victory 2004 Dinner in Santa Monica, California
August 12, 2004
Remember, before September the 11th, Pakistan was a transit point for Al Qaida.Today, Pakistan is a strong ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer for it.

Remarks in Sioux City, Iowa
August 14, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan was a safe transit point for terrorists. Today, Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer

The President's News Conference in Crawford, Texas
August 23, 2004
The President. You think he will? [Laughter] I'm looking forward to giving it. I want to talk about what I intend to do. We've got a great record, when you think about it: led the world in the war on terror; the world is safer as a result of the actions we've taken; Afghanistan is no longer run by the Taliban; Saddam Hussein sits in a prison cell; Muammar Qadhafi has gotten rid of his weapons; Pakistan is an ally in the war on terror. There's more work to be done in fighting off these terrorists. I clearly see that. I understand that we've got to use all resources at our disposal to find and bring these people to justice.

Remarks in Las Cruces, New Mexico
August 26, 2004
Before September 11th, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia didn't take Al Qaida seriously. Today, they are allies in the war on terror, and America and the world are safer

Remarks in Farmington, New Mexico
August 26, 2004
Before September the 11th, Pakistan and Saudi didn't take Al Qaida seriously. Today, they are allies in the war against the terrorists. America and the world are safer.

Remarks in a Discussion in Nashua, New Hampshire
August 30, 2004
Prior to September the 11th, Pakistan was friendly with the Taliban. And that could have been a very dangerous circumstance. Because of our action and because of our leadership, President Musharraf is an ally in the war on terror now. He's helping to chase down Al Qaida in remote regions of his country. He's helping to secure his borders as best as he can against the Taliban from infiltrating to kill people who are getting involved in the election. In other words, the world is changing, and it's going to change more as we continue to spread freedom.

Remarks Accepting the Presidential Nomination at the Republican National Convention in New York City
September 2, 2004
The President. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Today, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led; many have joined; and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in West Allis, Wisconsin
September 3, 2004
And we're working to advance liberty in the broader Middle East, because we know freedom will bring hope and peace, the peace we all want. Our strategy is working. Just remember this: Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned its attacks. Because we acted, because we were resolute and strong and firm, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. And more than three-quarters—three-quarters—of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led, many have joined, and America and the world are safer

Remarks in Moosic, Pennsylvania
September 3, 2004
And our strategy is succeeding. We're making progress. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for the terrorist groups. Saudi was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat, and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Now, after we acted, now after the United States led— and many have joined—the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror. Pakistan is capturing terrorists. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's members and associates have been detained or killed.

Remarks in Cedar Rapids, Iowa
September 3, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was a fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Today, because the United States and our friends and allies acted with firm resolve, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. Because we have led, America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Erie, Pennsylvania
September 4, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Kirtland, Ohio
September 4, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned its attacks. Because we acted, today, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more then three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Parkersburg, West Virginia
September 5, 2004
Listen, our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi was a fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Now, because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons program; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Poplar Bluff, Missouri
September 6, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. I want you to listen to this. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned its attacks. Because we acted, the Government of Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Columbia, Missouri
September 7, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in a Discussion in Sedalia, Missouri
September 7, 2004
As a matter of fact, I put together what's called the Proliferation Security Initiative, which is a 60-nation coalition, all aimed at intercepting the flow of technologies so that weapons of mass destruction don't get in the hands of our enemies. I don't know if you remember when we busted the A.Q. Khan network. This is a guy who was a fellow out of Pakistan that was selling technologies to North Korea and Iran. And we intercepted a ship—we, the coalition, intercepted a ship of materials aimed at Libya, which helped us make the case to Colonel Qadhafi, which caused him to make another decision about whether or not he was going to have weapons of mass destruction.

Remarks in Lee's Summit, Missouri
September 7, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was a home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Johnstown, Pennsylvania
September 9, 2004
The President. We will work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world, and we will prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Huntington, West Virginia
September 10, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago—4 short years ago—Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fund-raising; Libya was seriously pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Chillicothe, Ohio
September 10, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we led, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Battle Creek, Michigan
September 13, 2004
We're working to advance liberty around the world and in—most particularly, the broader Middle East, and we're going to prevail. We will prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, not all that long ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was a fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons program; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Holland, Michigan
September 13, 2004
The President. We will work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and throughout the world, and we will prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because we led, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's known leadership has been brought to justice. 


Remarks to the General Conference of the National Guard Association of the United States in Las Vegas, Nevada
September 14, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Greenwood Village, Colorado
September 14, 2004
We will work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and throughout the world, and we'll prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Rochester, Minnesota
September 16, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. Because we acted—— 
The President. Because we acted, the Government of Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in St. Cloud, Minnesota
September 16, 2004
We'll work to advance liberty around the world, in the broader Middle East and elsewhere, and we'll prevail—we will prevail. Our strategy is succeeding—it's succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for fundraising for the terrorists; Libya was pursuing—secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because we led, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key leaders and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks at a Victory 2004 Reception
September 17, 2004
Our strategy is working. When you're out gathering up the vote, remind people about what life was like 3 years ago, compared to today. Maybe this will help you: Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat, headed by a sworn enemy of the United States; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned its attacks. 
Because we acted, Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; Saudi Arabia is after Al Qaida; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks at a Rally in New York City
September 20, 2004
And we'll work to advance liberty in Afghanistan and Iraq and elsewhere, and we're going to prevail. We'll prevail. If we're steadfast, if we're steady, if we're strong, we'll prevail. I—our strategy is working. Just think about this. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist killers; Saudi was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it plotted and planned for death and destruction. Today, because we acted, because the United States has led, Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests on Al Qaida leadership; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; Iraq now has a free army, which is fighting for its freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's known leaders and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Latrobe, Pennsylvania
September 22, 2004
We'll work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world. And by being steadfast and resolved, we'll prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was the transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Bangor, Maine
September 23, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world some 4 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat. Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Today, because we acted, Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its nuclear weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's leaders and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Racine, Wisconsin
September 24, 2004
We will continue to work to advance liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world, and we'll prevail. Our strategy is succeeding. Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world only 4 short years ago: Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point of terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in a Discussion on Education in Springfield, Ohio
September 27, 2004
We're making progress. We're working with our friends and allies to bring Al Qaida to justice. Seventy-five percent of their leadership has been brought to justice. Just yesterday, if you noticed, that in Pakistan, one of the killers of Danny Pearl had been arrested. One by one, we're finding these people.

Remarks in West Chester, Ohio
September 27, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting terror; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members have been brought to justice. We've led; many have joined. And America and the world are safer. 

Presidential Debate in Coral Gables, Florida
September 30, 2004
My administration started what is called the Proliferation Security Initiative, over 60 nations involved with disrupting the trans-shipment of information and/or weapons of mass destruction materials. And we're— been effective. We busted the A.Q. Khan network. This was a proliferator out of Pakistan that was selling secrets to places like North Korea and Libya. We convinced Libya to disarm. It was an essential part of dealing with weapons of mass destruction and proliferation.

Remarks in Allentown, Pennsylvania
October 1, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about this: Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because America led, Afghanistan is free and is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Manchester, New Hampshire
October 1, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about this: Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting terror; and three-quarters of Al Qaida's leadership have been brought to justice

Remarks in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio
October 2, 2004
We will continue to spread freedom and liberty in the broader Middle East and around the world, and we will prevail. Our strategy is—see, you think about the world the way it was a while back. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering danger; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, a free Afghanistan is fighting terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida have been brought to justice. We've led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania
October 6, 2004
The Taliban regime that sheltered Al Qaida is gone from power, and the people of Afghanistan will vote in free elections this very week. A black market network that provided weapons materials to North Korea and Libya and Iran is now out of business. Libya, itself, has given up its weapons of mass destruction programs. We convinced Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to join the fight against the terrorists. And more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice

Remarks in Farmington Hills, Michigan
October 6, 2004
The Taliban regime that sheltered Al Qaida is gone from power, and the people of Afghanistan will vote in free elections this coming Saturday. A black market network that provided weapons materials to North Korea and Libya and Iran is now out of business. Libya, itself, has given up its weapons of mass destruction. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are joining the fight against the terrorists, and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Wausau, Wisconsin
October 7, 2004
The Taliban regime that sheltered Al Qaida is gone from power. And in 2 days' time, 10 million people, 41 percent of whom are women, have registered to vote in a Presidential election that will take place in 2 days' time. Think about that. Think about what's going on there. The black market network that weapons materials to North Korea and Libya and Iran is now out of business. Libya has given up its weapons of mass destruction programs. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia have joined the fight, and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led, many have followed, and America and the world are safer

Remarks in Chanhassen, Minnesota
October 9, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world the way it was prior to September the 11th. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat, and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror, and they're having Presidential elections today; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons program; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and three-quarters of Al Qaida—three-quarters of key members and associates of Al Qaida have been brought to justice. America has led. Many have followed. And the world is safer. 

Remarks at a Breakfast for Gubernatorial Candidate Matt Blunt in St. Louis, Missouri
October 9, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, because we acted, Afghanistan is fighting terror and holding a Presidential election today; Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; a army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's leaders and associates have been brought to justice. We've led. Many have joined, and America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Waterloo, Iowa
October 9, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was about 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is fighting terror and held a Presidential election today; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined. And America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Morrison, Colorado
October 11, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat, and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan held elections this weekend and is an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Hobbs, New Mexico
October 11, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Four years ago, Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida; Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists; Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorists' fundraising; Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons; Iraq was a gathering threat; and Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. That's the way the world was. 
Because we acted, the Government of a free Afghanistan held Presidential elections last weekend and is an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been detained or killed. We have led. Many have joined. And America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Colorado Springs, Colorado
October 12, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think of the world the way it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Al Qaida—Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place, run by a sworn enemy of America. Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, the Government of Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror, and they held Presidential elections last weekend. Because we acted, Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Reno, Nevada
October 14, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is a free society and is an ally in fighting the war against terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key leaders and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Central Point, Oregon
October 14, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Las Vegas, Nevada
October 14, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, Afghanistan is a free nation fighting terror. And last Saturday, the people of Afghanistan voted for a President. Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. And more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's leaders and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Cedar Rapids, Iowa
October 15, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was about 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined. And America and the world are safer. 

Remarks in Oshkosh, Wisconsin
October 15, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorists. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; and an army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice

Remarks in Daytona Beach, Florida
October 16, 2004
The strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was a fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida and its associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in West Palm Beach, Florida
October 16, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because the United States led, Afghanistan is free and an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. Because we acted to defend ourselves, more than 50 million people are now free, and that makes us more secure. 

Remarks in Sunrise, Florida
October 16, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror; Afghanistan held elections; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Marlton, New Jersey
October 18, 2004
After September the 11th, we set a new direction for American policy and enforced a doctrine that is clear to all: "If you support or harbor terrorists, you're equally guilty of terrorist murder." We destroyed the terror camps that trained thousands of killers in Afghanistan. We removed the Taliban from power. We have persuaded Governments in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to recognize the enemy and join the fight. We ended the regime of Saddam Hussein, which sponsored terror. Iraq's new Government under Prime Minister Allawi is hunting down terrorists in Iraq. We sent a message to Libya, which has now given up weapons of mass destruction programs and handed nuclear materials and equipment over to the United States. We have acted, through diplomacy and force, to shrink the area where the terrorists can operate freely, and that strategy has the terrorists on the run.

Remarks in St. Petersburg, Florida
October 19, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we acted, because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war against terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in New Port Richey, Florida
October 19, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world as it was 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for fund-raising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Today, because we acted, Afghanistan is free and is an ally on the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in The Villages, Florida
October 19, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world the way it was some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned attacks. 
Because we led, because the United States of America was firm in ourresolve, Afghanistan is free and is now an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Mason City, Iowa
October 20, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world the way it was some 3 1/2 years ago. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. It's where terrorists were training to inflict great harm on America and the free world. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned horrific attacks. 
But because we acted, because the United States of America was steadfast and resolved, Afghanistan is now a free nation and an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Hershey, Pennsylvania
October 21, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. Think about the world, the way it was some 3 1/2 years ago—think about this. Afghanistan was the home base of Al Qaida. Pakistan was a transit point for terrorist groups. Saudi Arabia was fertile ground for terrorist fundraising. Libya was secretly pursuing nuclear weapons. Iraq was a dangerous place and a gathering threat. And Al Qaida was largely unchallenged as it planned horrific attacks. 
Because the United States of America led, Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror and is now a free nation; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for its country's freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's associates and members have been brought to justice. 

Remarks in Council Bluffs, Iowa
October 25, 2004
We destroyed the terror camps that trained thousands of killers in Afghanistan. We removed the Taliban from power. We persuaded the Governments in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to recognize the enemy and to join the fight. We ended the regime of Saddam Hussein, which sponsored terror, and we know that America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell.

Remarks in Greeley, Colorado
October 25, 2004
After September the 11th, we set a new direction for American policy and enforced a doctrine that is clear to all: "If you supported or harbored terrorists, you are equally guilty of terrorist murder." We destroyed the terror camps that trained thousands of killers in Afghanistan. We removed the Taliban from power. We have persuaded Governments in Pakistan and Saudi Arabia to recognize the enemy and to join the fight. We ended the regime of Saddam Hussein, which sponsored terror. America and the world are safer with Saddam Hussein sitting in a prison cell. We sent a clear message to Libya, which has now given up its weapons of mass destruction programs. We have acted through diplomacy and force to shrink the area where the terrorists can freely operate. And that strategy has the terrorists on the run

Remarks in Toledo, Ohio
October 29, 2004
Because we led, Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Because we led, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. We have led. Many have joined. And America and the world are safer.

Remarks in Columbus, Ohio
October 29, 2004
Because we led, Afghanistan is a free Nation and an ally in the war on terror; Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Because we led, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice

Remarks in Portsmouth, New Hampshire
October 29, 2004
Because we have led, Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war on terror. Because we led, Pakistan is capturing terrorists, and Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Because we led, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. Because we led, the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Ashwaubenon, Wisconsin
October 30, 2004
Because we led, Afghanistan is a free nation and now an ally in the war on terror. Because we led, Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Because we led, Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. Because we led, an army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Minneapolis, Minnesota
October 30, 2004
Because we led, the world is changing. Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for the freedom of its people. And more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice

Remarks in Grand Rapids, Michigan
October 30, 2004
Our strategy is succeeding. As the September the 11th Commission pointed out, we are safer but not yet safe. But because we led, Afghanistan is a free nation and now an ally in the war on terror. Because we led, Pakistan is capturing terrorists; Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests; Libya is dismantling its weapons programs; the army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom; and more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Orlando, Florida
October 30, 2004
Because we led, the world is changing. Afghanistan is a free nation and an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan is capturing terrorist leaders. Saudi Arabia is making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons program. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. And more than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice.

Remarks in Tampa, Florida
October 31, 2004
And we're making progress. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons program. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. Al Qaida no longer controls territory like it did in Afghanistan. We have shut down its camps. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice. And the rest of them know we're on their trail.

Remarks in Cincinnati, Ohio
October 31, 2004
Afghanistan is free and is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. And Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We've shut down its camps. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida's known leaders and associates have been brought to justice. And the rest of them know we're on their trail.

Remarks in Miami, Florida
October 31, 2004
Pakistan was—we're making progress. Every day, we're making progress. Afghanistan is now an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi are making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. An army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. And Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We shut down its camps. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network around the world. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know we're on their trail.

Remarks in Gainesville, Florida
October 31, 2004
And we're succeeding. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and arrests. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom, and Al Qaida no longer controls territory like Afghanistan. They no longer have training camps there. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know we are on their trail.

Remarks in Albuquerque, New Mexico
November 1, 2004
And we are succeeding. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is defending freedom. Al Qaida no longer has training camps in Afghanistan. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know that we're on their trails.

Remarks in Sioux City, Iowa
November 1, 2004
We are succeeding. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making arrests and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is defending freedom. Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We have shut down its camps. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network. More than three-quarters of Al Qaida's key members and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know that we're on their trail

Remarks in Milwaukee, Wisconsin
November 1, 2004
We are succeeding. Afghanistan is free and an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making arrests and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is beginning to defend its freedom. Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We have shut down its camps there. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network.

Remarks in Burgettstown, Pennsylvania
November 1, 2004
We're succeeding. Afghanistan is free and an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons program. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We've shut down its camps there. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network

Remarks in Wilmington, Ohio
November 1, 2004
The 9/11 Commission report said America is safer but not yet safe. We're making progress. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and capturing terrorist leaders. Lybia is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is fighting for freedom. Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We've shut down their camps. We are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world. More than three-quarters of its key leaders and associates have been brought to justice, and the rest of them know we're on their trail.

Remarks in Des Moines, Iowa
November 1, 2004
We're succeeding. Afghanistan is an ally in the war on terror. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia are making raids and capturing terrorist leaders. Libya is dismantling its weapons programs. The army of a free Iraq is defending freedom. And Al Qaida no longer controls Afghanistan. We've shut down camps there, and we are systematically destroying the Al Qaida network across the world.

Remarks Following Discussions With President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan and an Exchange With Reporters
December 4, 2004
President Bush. It's my honor to welcome a friend, a leader, President Musharraf of Pakistan. He is a person with whom I've worked very closely over the past 4 years, a person with whom I look forward to working closely over the next 4 years. And we had a really good discussion. 
We discussed international politics. I assured President Musharraf that there is an opportunity at hand to work toward the development of a Palestinian state and peace in the Middle East. I told him that this will be a priority of my administration. The goal is two states living side by side in peace and security. 
We spent time talking about our bilateral relations. We reviewed the relationship between India and Pakistan. He has showed great courage in that relationship, leading toward what we hope will be a peaceful solution of what has been a historically difficult problem. 
We talked about our own bilateral relations. The President and I are absolutely committed to fighting off the terrorists who would destroy life in Pakistan or the United States or anywhere else. And I appreciate very much your clear vision of the need for people of good will and hope to prevail over those who are willing to inflict death in order to achieve an ideology that is— the predominance of an ideology that is just backward and dark in its view. 
I—we talked about commerce between our countries. The President is very concerned about whether or not Pakistan goods are being treated equally, as fairly as other goods coming into the United States. I listened very carefully to what he had to say. He had some constructive ideas as to how to deal with that situation. 
Having brought up his economy, however, I reminded him that he's doing quite a good job of making sure that the economy grows in Pakistan so that people have got a chance to realize their dreams. And I congratulate you on the good stewardship of the Pakistan economy. 
All in all, our relationships are good; they're strong; and they will remain that way. And I'm honored you're here. 
We'll answer a question from the American side, and the Pakistani side, and the American side, and Pakistani side. And that will be it, in the spirit of Saturday morning meetings. And so the first person that will be asking the question will be Mr. Mark Knoller [CBS Radio].
President Bush. Actually, I wasn't asking you necessarily to answer the question; I was asking you to callon somebody from the Pakistani press, I'm sorry. [Laughter] You don't have to answer every question they ask me. I would advise you not answering those questions. [Laughter] 
President Bush. Well, first of all, I don't view relations as, one, that there's a scorecard that says, you know, "Well, if we all fight terror together, therefore, somebody owes somebody something." This is a world in which cooperation is essential, and mutual cooperation is really essential between Pakistan and the United States. 
Obviously, there's ways to strengthen our bilateral relations. The President and I are constantly discussing ways to do so. After all, he is the strongest advocate for the Pakistan people I have ever met. His duty is to represent Pakistan, and so, therefore, we talk about ways to enhance trade. Trade between the United States and Pakistan is good. It can be better, and we discussed ways to enhance that. 
But our cooperation has been very strong. But let me just say something. Friends don't sit there and have a scorecard that says, "Well, he did this," or "He did that, and therefore, somebody is—there's a deficit." Our relationship is much bigger than that. Our relationship is one where we work closely together for the common good of our own people and for the common good of the world. 
President Bush. Quite the contrary. His army has been incredibly active and very brave in southern Waziristan, flushing out an enemy that had thought they had found safe haven. His army has suffered casualty, and for that, we want to thank their loved ones for the sacrifice that their family has made. 
The President has been a determined leader to bring to justice not only people like Usama bin Laden but to bring to justice those who would inflict harm and pain on his own people. Remember, this is a man whose life had been threatened by and still is threatened by Al Qaida leadership. He's the person who survived two direct assassination attempts. And there is nobody more dedicated than—in the protection of his own people than President Musharraf. 
And I am very pleased with his efforts and his focused efforts, and our discussions today were to determine how best we can help the President achieve his objective and—which is not only protect himself but protect his country. 
President Bush. I think the long-term vision is one that is a relationship which is very mature in this sense: that there is a commercial relationship which is fair and balanced, mutually beneficial to both people; a defense relationship which is one in which there is close collaboration and complementary efforts based upon the true threats of the 21st century; and thirdly, there's a relationship in which I can callupon my friend to help deal with international issues such as the development of a Palestinian state, one in which the aspirations of the Palestinian people are met and listened to because democracy has taken hold. 
One of the interesting lessons that the world can look at is Pakistan. You see, there are some in the world who do not believe that a Muslim society can self-govern. Some believe that the only solution for government in parts of the world is for there to be tyranny or despotism. I don't believe that. The Pakistan people have proven that those cynics are wrong. And where President Musharraf can help in world peace is to help remind people what is possible. And the solution in the Middle East is for there to be a world effort to help the Palestinians develop a state that is truly free, one that's got an independent judiciary, one that's got a civil society, one that's got the capacity to fight off the terrorists, one that allows for dissent, one in which people can vote. And President Musharraf can play a big role in helping achieve that objective. 
None of us can convince the Palestinians to say—or make the Palestinians adhere to this point of view, but we can help convince them. And that's precisely what I intend to do. And as a Palestinian state evolves there will be much more confidence, and when that happens, peace is more likely to happen. 
And I look forward to working with this world leader on that important issue. 

The President's News Conference
December 20, 2004
The President. Right, thank you. If I had to guess, I would guess that Usama bin Laden is in a remote region on the Afghan-Pakistan border. But I don't have to guess at the damage we have done to his organization. Many of his senior operators have been killed or detained. Pakistan Government has been aggressive in pursuit of Al Qaida targets in Waziristan. 
And I appreciate the work of President Musharraf. He came the other day, on a Saturday morning, to the White House, and it was an opportunity to thank him once again for some of the bold steps he's taken. And Al Qaida is dangerous, no question about it. But we've got a good strategy, and it's a strategy that requires cooperation with other nations, and the cooperation has been great when it comes to sharing intelligence and cutting off finances and arresting people or killing people. We'll stay on the hunt. 

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
February 2, 2005
Other nations around the globe have stood with us. In Afghanistan, an international force is helping provide security. In Iraq, 28 countries have troops on the ground, the United Nations and the European Union provided technical assistance for the elections, and NATO is leading a mission to help train Iraqi officers. We're cooperating with 60 governments in the Proliferation Security Initiative to detect and stop the transit of dangerous materials. We're working closely with the governments in Asia to convince North Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, and nine other countries have captured or detained Al Qaida terrorists. In the next 4 years, my administration will continue to build the coalitions that will defeat the dangers of our time.


Remarks on the War on Terror
March 8, 2005
In 3 1/2 years, the United States and our allies have waged a campaign of global scale, from the mountains of Afghanistan to the border regions of Pakistan, to the Horn of Africa, to the islands of the Philippines, to the plains of North Central Iraq. The Al Qaida terror network that attacked our country still has leaders, but many of its top commanders have been removed. There are still governments that sponsor and harbor terrorists, but their number has declined. There are still regimes seeking weapons of mass destruction but no longer without attention and without consequence.Our country is still the target of terrorists who want to kill many and intimidate us all. We will stay on the offensive against them until the fight is won. 
We're more secure because Pakistani forces captured more than 100 extremists across the country last year, including operatives who were plotting attacks against the United States. We're more secure because Britain arrested an Al Qaida operative who had provided detailed casing reports on American targets to senior Al Qaida leaders. We're more secure because German authorities arrested extremists who were planning attacks against U.S. and coalition targets in Iraq. We're more secure because the Philippines' new Anti-Terrorism Task Force has helped capture more than a dozen terrorist suspects, including seven members of Al Qaida and affiliated networks. We're more secure because Poland is leading a 15-nation multinational division in Iraq, and forces from 23 countries have given their lives in the struggle against terrorists and insurgents in Afghanistan and Iraq. 

The President's News Conference With President Vicente Fox of Mexico and Prime Minister Paul Martin of Canada in Waco, Texas
March 23, 2005
President Bush. Thank you for bringing up Secretary Rice. She just got back from her trip Monday evening and came down to Crawford yesterday to brief me on the trip. I'm grateful that she took time out of her schedule to come down and talk about not only the discussions she had with China but discussions she had with South Korea and Japan, the leaders of India and Pakistan. And she also went to Afghanistan, so she had an extensive trip. It was about a 2-hour briefing, I want you to know.

Remarks Prior to a Briefing on the Findings of the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction
March 31, 2005
To win the war on terror, we will correct what needs to be fixed and build on what the Commission calls solid intelligence successes. These include the uncovering of Libya's nuclear and missile programs. In Pakistan, our intelligence helped expose and shut down the world's most dangerous nuclear proliferation network. Where we have had success, the Commission reports we have seen innovative collection techniques and a fusion of interagency intelligence capabilities. We must work to replicate these successes in other areas.

The President's Radio Address
April 2, 2005
The Commission's report delivers a sharp critique of the way intelligence has been collected and analyzed against some of the most difficult intelligence targets, like Iraq. To win the war on terror, we will correct what needs to be fixed and build on what the Commission calls "solid intelligence successes." These include the uncovering of Libya's nuclear and missile programs, which led Libya's leader to renounce weapons of mass destruction. In Pakistan, our intelligence helped expose and shut down the world's most dangerous nuclear proliferation network. We need to learn from the successes we've had and apply the lessons elsewhere.

Interview With Estonian Television
May 4, 2005
I've always told the American people here, "It's best to find them where they try to hide so that we don't have to deal with them here at home." And so part of the reasons why there's—activity is up is because we're chasing them down. As a matter of fact, today a big news report came out that I would say one of the top Al Qaida leaders, a person very close to Usama bin Laden, was brought to justice in Pakistan by the Pak Government, with our help, but nevertheless, the Pak Government did the hard work—Abu Faraj al-Libbi. That's a very important part of defeating the Al Qaida.

Remarks in a Discussion on Strengthening Social Security at the Latino Small Business Economic Conference
May 4, 2005
I applaud the Pakistani Government for their strong cooperation in the war on terror. I applaud the Pakistani Government and President Musharraf for acting on solid intelligence to bring this man to justice. The fight continues. We'll stay on the offensive until Al Qaida is defeated.

The President's Radio Address
May 21, 2005
Terrorists know that there is no room for them as freedom takes root in the broader Middle East, so they are fighting to stop its progress. But in recent weeks, we have dealt them a series of devastating blows. In Afghanistan, we have brought to justice dozens of terrorists and insurgents. In Pakistan, one of Usama bin Laden's senior terrorist leaders, a man named al-Libbi, was brought to justice. In Iraq, we captured two deputies of the terrorist Zarqawi, and our forces have killed or captured hundreds of terrorists and insurgents near the Syrian border.







