MID 457501, Pakistan

Remarks to the Military Officers Association of America
September 5, 2006
Second, we're determined to deny weapons of mass destruction to outlaw regimes and terrorists who would use them without hesitation. Working with Great Britain and Pakistan and other nations, the United States shut down the world's most dangerous nuclear trading cartel, the A.Q. Khan network. This network had supplied Iran and Libya and North Korea with equipment and know-how that advanced their efforts to obtain nuclear weapons. And we launched the Proliferation Security Initiative, a coalition of more than 70 nations that is working together to stop shipments related to weapons of mass destruction on land, at sea, and in the air. The greatest threat this world faces is the danger of extremists and terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction, and this is a threat America cannot defeat on her own. We applaud the determined efforts of many nations around the world to stop the spread of these dangerous weapons. Together, we pledge we'll continue to work together to stop the world's most dangerous men from getting their hands on the world's most dangerous weapons.

Remarks on the War on Terror
September 6, 2006
Based on that information, Zubair was captured in June of 2003, and he soon provided information that helped lead to the capture of Hambali. After Hambali's arrest, KSM was questioned again. He identified Hambali's brother as the leader of a JI cell and Hambali's conduit for communications with Al Qaida. Hambali's brother was soon captured in Pakistan and in turn led us to a cell of 17 Southeast Asian JI operatives. When confronted with the news that his terror cell had been broken up, Hambali admitted that the operatives were being groomed at KSM's request for attacks inside the United States, probably using airplanes.

Remarks to the Georgia Public Policy Foundation in Atlanta, Georgia
September 7, 2006
And so America has gone on the offense across the world. And here are some of the results. We've captured or killed many of the most significant Al Qaida members and associates. We've killed Al Qaida's most visible and aggressive leader to emerge after 9/11, the terrorist Zarqawi in Iraq. We've kept the terrorists from achieving their key goal, to overthrow governments across the broader Middle East and to seize control. Instead, the governments they targeted, such as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, have become some of the most valuable allies in the war on terror. These countries are joined by the largest coalition in the history of warfare, more than 90 nations determined to find the terrorists, to dry up their funds, to stop their plots, and to bring them to justice.

The President's News Conference
September 15, 2006
We've also learned information from the CIA program that has helped stop other plots, including attacks on the U.S. Marine base in East Africa or American consulate in Pakistan or Britain's Heathrow Airport. This program has been one of the most vital tools in our efforts to protect this country. It's been invaluable to our country, and it's invaluable to our allies.
The President. Yes. 
The President. It's because, first of all, Pakistan is a sovereign nation. 
The President. We are, Richard. Thank you. Thanks for asking the question. They were asking me about somebody's report, well, Special Forces here—Pakistan—if he is in Pakistan, which this person thought he might be, who is asking the question— Pakistan is a sovereign nation. In order for us to send thousands of troops into a sovereign nation, we've got to be invited by the Government of Pakistan. 
And I look forward to talking to President Musharraf. Look, he doesn't like Al Qaida. They tried to kill him. And we've had a good record of bringing people to justice inside of Pakistan, because the Paks are in the lead. They know the stakes about dealing with a violent form of ideological extremists. 

The President's Radio Address
September 16, 2006
This bill will also provide clear rules for our personnel involved in detaining and questioning captured terrorists. The information the Central Intelligence Agency has obtained by questioning men like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed has helped disrupt terrorist plots, including planned strikes inside the United States and on a U.S. Marine base in east Africa, an American consulate in Pakistan, and Britain's Heathrow Airport. This CIA program has saved American lives and the lives of people in other countries.

The President's News Conference With President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan
September 22, 2006
President Bush. Thank you very much. Please be seated. Laura and I appreciate the opportunity to welcome President and Mrs. Musharraf here to Washington. We remember fondly, Mr. President, your great hospitality in Pakistan, and we remember the importance of that visit. It reconfirmed our friendship, gave you and me a chance to discuss important issues. And there's no more important issue than defending our peoples. 
This President is a strong defender of freedom and the people of Pakistan, and I appreciate your leadership. 
President Bush. He understands that we are in a struggle against extremists who will use terror as a weapon. He understands it just about as good as anybody in the world; after all, they've tried to take his life. These extremists, who can't stand the thought of a moderate leader leading an important country like Pakistan, want to kill the President. That should say things to the people of Pakistan and the people of America, that because he has been a strong, forceful leader, he has become a target of those who can't stand the thought of moderation prevailing. 
I admire your leadership. I admire your courage. And I thank you very much for working on common strategies to protect our respective peoples. 
We had a good discussion here today. We talked about how our intelligence cooperation can continue. I want to remind the people of Pakistan and the people of America that because of the good work of our intelligence forces and Pakistani intelligence forces, as we helped people in the United Kingdom, we prevented the loss of innocent life. That kind of cooperation is necessary in a world in which extremists and radicals are willing to kill to try to achieve political objectives. 
We talked about the earthquake recovery, and our Nation was proud to support you, Mr. President, because we care when we see people suffering. And I was briefed by you and your administration when I was there, and I was impressed by the great organization and compassion shown for the Pakistani people by your Government. I hope all is going well, particularly for those who suffered mightily. 
We talked about economic development and the need to move forward on a reconstruction opportunity zones as well as a bilateral investment treaty. In other words, our relationship is more than just helping to secure our respective homelands. Ours is a relationship that recognizes that through economic prosperity, people can embetter themselves. 
We had a very interesting briefing on the federally administered tribal areas. The governor of the areas are with us here, and he briefed me and members of my national security team on the strategy to strengthen governance and to promote economic development. 
We talked about education. The first time I ever met President Musharraf, he talked about the need to make sure that school systems in Pakistan worked well. I was impressed then and I'm impressed now by yourcommitment to an education system that prepares students for the—and gives students the skills necessary to compete in a global economy. 
We talked about democracy. The last time I was with the President, he assured me and assured the people that were listening to the news conference that there would be free and fair elections in Pakistan in 2007. He renewed that commitment because he understands that the best way to defeat radicalism and extremism is to give people a chance to participate in the political process of a nation. 
We talked about India in relations—and the President's relations with India. I was pleased to see that in Havana Prime Minister Singh and President Musharraf had another discussion. I think it's very important that the issue of Kashmir move forward and be resolved peacefully. And I appreciate your efforts, Mr. President. 
We talked, of course, about Afghanistan. And President Musharraf and President Karzai and I will have dinner right here in the White House next week. And it's going to be an important discussion. It's going to be an important discussion because one of the most important avenues for peace is for Afghanistan to succeed. And it's in our mutual interests that we work together to help that country that's been devastated by war succeed. And so I'm looking forward to our trilateral discussion, Mr. President. It's going to be a good one, and it's going to be an interesting one. And it's an important discussion. 
All in all, we've had yet another good meeting between people who are able to speak frankly with each other and people who share the common desire for our people to live in security and peace. 
All I can tell you is, is that shortly after 9/11, Secretary Colin Powell came in and said, "President Musharraf understands the stakes, and he wants to join and help rout out an enemy that has come and killed 3,000 of our citizens." As a matter of fact, my recollection was that one of the first leaders to step up and say that the stakes have changed, that attack on America that killed 3,000 of the citizens needs to be dealt with firmly, was the President. And if I'm not mistaken, Colin told us that, if not the night of September the 11th, shortly thereafter. Now, I need to make sure I get my facts straight, but it was soon. 
I don't know of any conversation that was reported in the newspaper like that. I just don't know about it. 
President Bush. I appreciate the President's leadership in promoting harmony. There is unbelievable propaganda in the Middle East these days that try to inflame passion. The propagandists are attempting to create conditions where terror is justified. And so at my speech at the United Nations, I stood up and said loud and clear, America respects Islam. And we do. We don't respect people who kill in the name of Islam to achieve political objectives, like the terrorists do.
We will continue to give aid to people who suffer. We didn't ask the question whether—you know, what was the nature of the religion of the people who suffered in Pakistan when we spent a half a billion dollars to help this President. We said, they're suffering, and we want to help. And so we will continue to outreach.
President Bush. Well, first of all, I appreciate the briefing on the tribal deal. When the President looks me in the eye and says, "The tribal deal is intended to reject the Talibanization of the people and that there won't be a Taliban and won't be Al Qaida," I believe him, you know. This is a person with whom I've now had close working relationships for 51?2 years. And when he says, "If we find—when we find Usama bin Laden, he will be brought to justice," I believe him. And we'll let the tactics speak for themselves after it happens. 
We're on the hunt together. It's in the President's interest that Al Qaida be brought to justice, and it's in our interest. And we collaborate and we strategize and we talk a lot about how best to do this. 
President Bush. All I can tell you is, is that when Usama bin Laden is found, he will be brought to justice. And that's what we've continually discussed. 
President Bush. Man, you represented the entire press corps there; that's good. [Laughter] We talked about energy, and we talked about our need to work through the recent history that we've had together on dealing with proliferation matters. 
Secondly, in terms of Kashmir and Palestine, Kashmir issue will be solved when two leaders decide to solve it. And we want to help. The United States can't force nations to reach an agreement just because we want there to be an agreement. Lasting agreements occur when leaders of nations say, "Let's get the past behind us, and let's move forward." 
I am encouraged by the meetings that the President and the Prime Minister of India have had. It is an indication that there is desire at the leadership level to solve this long-standing problem. 
Leadership is also going to be required between Israel and Palestine. We, of course, can help and will help. But it's important for you to understand that we cannot impose peace. We can help create the conditions for peace to occur. We can lay out vision. We can talk to world leaders, and we do. We can provide aid to help institutional building so that a democracy can flourish. 
But ultimately, peace, longstanding peace, depends upon the will of leaders. I'm impressed by this President's will to get something done in Kashmir. He and I have talked about this issue in the past. He has said he was going to reach out to the Prime Minister of India, and he has. And our hope is that this process continues forward. 
I asked the President, just like I would ask the Prime Minister of India, what can we do to help? What would you like the United States to do to facilitate an agreement? Would you like us to get out of the way? Would you like us not to show up? Would you like us to be actively involved? How can we help you, if you so desire, achieve peace? And that's the role of the United States, as far as I'm concerned. 

The President's Radio Address
September 23, 2006
Next week I will host a meeting at the White House with two courageous leaders, President Karzai of Afghanistan and President Musharraf of Pakistan. These two leaders are working to defeat the forces of terrorism and extremism. Under President Musharraf, Pakistan is siding with the forces of freedom and moderation and helping to defend the civilized world. Many Pakistani forces have given their lives in the fight against terrorists. President Musharraf understands the stakes in the war on terror because the extremists have tried more than once to assassinate him. They know he's a threat to their aspirations because he's working to build modern democratic institutions that could provide an alternative to radicalism. And it is in America's interest to help him succeed.

The President's News Conference With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan
September 26, 2006
Tomorrow President Karzai and President Musharraf and I will have dinner. I'm looking forward to it. It's going to be an interesting discussion amongst three allies, three people who are concerned about the future of Pakistan and Afghanistan. It will be a chance for us to work on how to secure the border, how we can continue to work together and share information so we can defeat extremists, how we can work together to build a future of peace and democracy in your region, Mr. President.
President Bush. No. No, it doesn't. It's in President Karzai's interest to see bin Laden brought to justice. It is in President Musharraf's interest to see bin Laden brought to justice. Our interests coincide. It will be interesting for me to watch the body language of these two leaders to determine how tense things are. 
President Bush. Yes. From my discussions with President Karzai and President Musharraf, there is an understanding that by working together, it is more likely that all of us can achieve a common objective, which are stable societies that are hopeful societies, that prevent extremists from stopping progress and denying people a hopeful world. 
I know that's what President Karzai thinks, and I know that's how President Musharraf thinks. And so—I'm kind of teasing about the body language for the dinner tomorrow night, but it's going to be a good dinner, and it's an important dinner. 
So to answer your question, no. What you perceive as tension is stopping us from bringing high-value targets to justice, quite the contrary, we're working as hard as ever in doing that. 

Remarks Prior to Discussions With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan
September 27, 2006
President Bush. Tonight it's my honor to host a dinner with President Musharraf of Pakistan and President Karzai of Afghanistan. These two men are personal friends of mine; they are strong leaders who have a understanding of the world in which we live; they understand that the forces of moderation are being challenged by extremists and radicals. And we're working closely together to help improve the lives of the people in Afghanistan and the people in Pakistan. 
President Musharraf kindly greeted me to Pakistan. I had the great privilege of meeting many in his Government. I met people in the civil society there. I met those who were helping the Pakistan citizens who were—whose lives were turned upside down by the devastating earthquake. I saw the compassion of this Government, and I was very proud that the American people were helping them recover. 
We've got a lot of challenges facing us. All of us must protect our countries, but at the same time, we all must work to make the world a more hopeful place. And so today's dinner is a chance for us to strategize together, to talk about the need to cooperate, to make sure that people have got a hopeful future. 
It's very important for the people in Pakistan and Afghanistan to understand that America respects religion, and we respect the right for people to worship the way they see fit. We welcome Muslim leaders here in the White House. I look forward to having dinner with friends of mine who don't happen to share the same faith I do, but nevertheless share the same outlook for a hopeful world. 
As we work for a more hopeful world, we will continue to make sure that extremists, such as Usama bin Laden, that wants to hurt my friend here as well as upset the democracy in Afghanistan is brought to justice. The main thing I was looking forward to talking about is how the United States Government and the people of the United States can help these two countries provide a foundation for hope. And so I want to thank you for coming. We're proud to have you here, Mr. President

Remarks to the Reserve Officers Association
September 29, 2006
This week in Washington, I met with two courageous leaders who are working for peace, President Karzai of Afghanistan and President Musharraf of Pakistan. These leaders understand the stakes in the struggle, in the ideological struggle of the 21st century. They understand the stakes from a personal perspective as well, since the extremists have tried to assassinate them. They are courageous people. They have seen the destruction that terrorists have caused in their own country, and they know this: That the only way to stop them is to work together and to stay on the offense. By standing with brave leaders like these, we are defending civilization itself and we're building a more peaceful world for our children and grandchildren. 
I appreciate very much the Ambassador from Afghanistan, Ambassador Jawad, and Ambassador Durrani from Pakistan for joining us here today. Thank you all for coming. I appreciate members of my administration who have joined us. I appreciate people wearing the uniform who have joined us. I appreciate those from Walter Reed who have joined us and from Bethesda. I thank you for your sacrifice. 
Earlier this month, our Nation marked the fifth anniversary of the September the 11th, 2001, terrorist attacks. We paused on that day to remember the innocent people who were killed that day. We paused to remember the rescue workers who rushed into burning towers to save lives. After 9/ 11, I stood in the well of the House of Representatives and declared that every nation, in every region, had a decision to make: Either you were with us, or you stood with the terrorists. Two nations, Afghanistan and Pakistan, made very different decisions with very different results.
The NATO deployment has begun to bring security and reconstruction to a region that had previously had little and has allowed the United States and Afghan forces to stay on the offense. And so we launched another major offensive in the east called Operation Mountain Fury. The operation is ongoing. It's aimed at clearing out enemy safe havens in five Afghan Provinces, including three Provinces bordering Pakistan. The operation is being led by about 4,000 Afghan forces and supported by about 3,000 of our finest. And Afghan and coalition forces clear out the enemy— then we will follow up with reconstruction assistance—so we can improve the quality of life for local Afghans and help extend the authority of the central Government to distant areas of the country.
Five years ago, another country that faced a choice was Pakistan. At the time of 9/11, Pakistan was only one of three nations that recognized the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Al Qaida had a large presence in Pakistan. There was a strong radical Islamic movement in that country. Some of the 9/11 hijackers were housed and trained in Pakistan. Pakistan's future was in doubt, and President Musharraf understood that he had to make a fundamental choice for his people. He could turn a blind eye and leave the people hostage to the extremists, or he could join the free world in fighting the extremists and the terrorists. President Musharraf made the choice to fight for freedom, and the United States of America is grateful for his leadership. 
Within 2 days of the September the 11th attacks, the Pakistani Government committed itself to stop Al Qaida operatives at its border, to share intelligence on terrorist activities and movements, and to break off all ties with the Taliban government if it refused to hand over bin Laden and the Al Qaida. President Musharraf's decision to fight the terrorists was made at great personal risk. They have tried to kill him as a result of his decision because they know he has chosen to side with the forces of peace and moderation and that he stands in the way of their hateful vision for his country. 
President Musharraf's courageous choice to join the struggle against extremism has saved American lives. His Government has helped capture or kill many senior terrorist leaders. For example, Pakistani forces helped capture Abu Zubaydah, a man we believe to be a trusted associate of Usama bin Laden. Pakistani forces helped capture another individual believed to be one of the key plotters of the 9/11 attacks, Ramzi bin al-Shibh. Pakistani forces helped capture the man our intelligence community believes masterminded the 9/11 attacks, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed. 
Were it not for the information gained from the terrorists captured with the help of Pakistan, our intelligence community believes that Al Qaida and its allies would have succeeded in launching another attack against the American homeland. Our close cooperation with the Government of Pakistan has saved American lives, and America is grateful to have a strong and steadfast ally in the war against these terrorists. 
President Musharraf understands that the terrorists hide in remote regions and travel back and forth across the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan. And so we're helping his Government establish stronger control over these border areas. We are helping him to equip the nation's paramilitary Frontier Corps that is policing the border regions. The United States is funding the construction of more than 100 border outposts, which will provide Pakistani forces with better access to remote areas of the country's western border. We're providing high-tech equipment to help Pakistani forces better locate terrorists attempting to cross the border. We are funding an air wing with helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft to give Pakistan better security and surveillance capabilities. 
And as we work with President Musharraf to bring security to his own country, we're also supporting him as he takes steps to build a modern and moderate nation that will hold free and fair elections next year. In an address to his fellow citizens earlier this year, President Musharraf declared this: "We have to eliminate extremism in our society. It will eat us up from within. So it is my appeal to all of you to shun extremism. Adopt the path of moderation. We will eliminate this extremism in our society, and then Pakistan will be considered a moderate, developed country." President Musharraf has a clear vision for his country as a nation growing in freedom and prosperity and peace. And as he stands against the terrorists and for the free future of his country, the United States of America will stand with him. 
In both Pakistan and Afghanistan, America has strong allies who arecommitted to rooting out the terrorists in their midst. And with their help, we've killed or captured hundreds of Al Qaida leaders and operatives, and we put the others on the run. Usama bin Laden and other terrorists are still in hiding. Our message to them is clear: No matter how long it takes, we will find you, and we're going to bring you to justice. 
On Wednesday night, I had dinner with Presidents Musharraf and Karzai at the White House. We had a long—and we had a frank conversation about the challenges we face in defeating the extremists and the terrorists in their countries and providing the people of these two nations an alternative to the dark ideology of the enemy. We discussed the best ways to improve intelligence sharing so that we can target and eliminate the leaders of Al Qaida and the Taliban. 
We resolved to strengthen the institutions of civil society in both countries. We agreed on the need to support tribal leaders on both sides of the border. By helping these local leaders build schools and roads and health clinics, we will help them build a better life for their communities and strengthen their hand against—the fight against the extremists. It was clear from our conversation that our three nations share the same goals: We will defeat the Taliban; we will defeat Al Qaida; and the only way to do it is by working together. 

Remarks to the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research
February 15, 2007
In recent months, the intensity of the fighting has died down—that's only natural. It does every year when the snow and ice set in there in Afghanistan. But even in these winter months, we stayed on the offense against the Taliban and Al Qaida. This January, NATO reconnaissance units observed a major Taliban incursion from Pakistan—with about 150 Taliban fighters crossing the border into the Paktika Province. So NATO and Afghan forces launched a coordinated air assault and ground assault, and we destroyed the Taliban force. A large number of enemy fighters were killed; they were forced to retreat, where they were engaged by Pakistani troops
Now, there's another part of our strategy I want to share with you, and that is to help President Musharraf defeat the terrorists and extremists who operate inside of Pakistan. We're going to work with Pakistan and Afghanistan to enhance cooperation to defeat what I would call a common enemy. Taliban and Al Qaida fighters do hide in remote regions of Pakistan—this is wild country. This is wilder than the Wild West. And these folks hide and recruit and launch attacks. 
The President understands our desire to work with him to eliminate this kind of action. People say, "Well, do you think President Musharraf really understands the threat of extremists in his midst?" I said, "Yes, I do." You know how I know? They've tried to kill him. Al Qaida has launched attacks against the President of this country. He understands. He also understands that extremists can destabilize countries on the border or destabilize countries from which they launch their attacks. And so he's launched what they call a frontier strategy, and that is to find and eliminate the extremists and deliver better governance and economic opportunity. 
We're helping him in these efforts. It's in our interest to help him. We provided him—we've helped him equip his security forces that are patrolling the border regions with Afghanistan. We're funding construction of more than 100 border outposts, which will provide their forces with better access to remote regions of this part of the country. We've given him high-tech equipment to help the Pakistani forces locate the terrorists attempting to cross the border. We're funding an air wing, with helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, to give Pakistan better security, better swift response, and better surveillance. 
President Musharraf is going to better be able to now deal with this problem. Bob Gates went out and visited with him recently—had a good response. He's an ally in this war on terror, and it's in our interest to support him in fighting the extremists. 
I also had an interesting meeting at the White House last September—and that is, I hosted a private dinner with President Musharraf and President Karzai, right there in what's called the Family Dining Room. It was a fascinating discussion. Clearly there are different histories and different anxieties about the way forward. We did reach some agreements, however: that it's in all our interests for people to work together, for example, to improve intelligence sharing. It's in our interest to expand trade between these two countries. In other words, on the one hand, it's in our interest to work closely on security for security operations, but it's also in our mutual inter-est—all three of our interests—to provide different alternatives for people to choose from. 
Remember, I said earlier that oftentimes, people support the Taliban—or sometimes, they support the Taliban in Afghanistan because it's the only job they can find. If that's the case—and I believe it's true— we need to help these folks provide an economy that gives hope. And so one way we can do this is what we call reconstruction opportunity zones that exist on both sides of the Pak and Afghan border. These zones will give residents the chance to export locally made products to the United States, duty free. That's our contribution. Got a vast market, wealthy country with a lot of consumers, and it's not going to take much to provide hope if we can get little manufacturing enterprises set up, local entrepreneurs to be able to manufacture goods and sell them here in our country. It's a tiny contribution for us and a major contribution for providing the conditions necessary for stability. 
Well, I'm going to continue to work with both the leaders. It's a useful role for the President of the United States to be in constant contact with both Presidents, to remind them of the great obligations we have to fight the extremists and to help people realize dreams. 

Remarks Following a Meeting With United States Ambassador-Designate to Iraq Ryan C. Crocker
February 16, 2007
The President. I just had a lengthy conversation with our nominee to be the Ambassador from the United States to Iraq. I've gotten to know Ambassador Ryan Crocker during my time as President because he's been—fulfilled a very important mission for the United States, and that is the Ambassador to Pakistan, where he served ably and served well. And I'm confident I picked the right man to be our new Ambassador in Iraq.
By the way, we're looking forward to quick Senate confirmation. He's had his hearing. And of course, when I call him "Ambassador," it's not Ambassador to Iraq—it's Ambassador-designee to Iraq— but Ambassador now in Pakistan. And the Senate needs to confirm him as quickly as possible so he can join General Petraeus and do the job.

Commencement Address at the United States Coast Guard Academy in New London, Connecticut
May 23, 2007
In May of 2005, Abu Faraj was captured and taken into CIA custody. Several months later, in December 2005, Rabia was killed in Pakistan. Several months after that, in June of 2006, the terrorist Zarqawi was killed by American forces in Iraq. Successes like these are blows to Al Qaida. They're a testament to the steps we have taken to strengthen our intelligence, work closely with partners overseas, and keep the pressure on the enemy by staying on the offense.

Remarks to the Democracy and Security Conference in Prague
June 5, 2007
The United States is also using our influence to urge valued partners like Egypt and Saudi Arabia and Pakistan to move toward freedom. These nations have taken brave stands and strong action to confront extremists, along with some steps to expand liberty and transparency. Yet they have a great distance still to travel. The United States will continue to press nations like these to open up their political systems and give greater voice to their people. Inevitably, this creates tension. But our relationships with these countries are broad enough and deep enough to bear it. As our relationships with South Korea and Taiwan during the cold war prove, America can maintain a friendship and push a nation toward democracy at the same time.

Interview With Members of the White House Press Pool in Heiligendamm, Germany
June 6, 2007
The President. I do, and said that in Pakistan the time I was there, standing right next to President Musharraf. And we do discuss democracy, as well as routing out foreigners in his country who are an equal threat, a threat to America and a threat to him. 
It's a very—Pakistan is an important ally in this war against these extremists. As you mentioned, there are some in his country, and I'm convinced that he would like to rout them out. But it's not easy territory in which to rout people out. We've had some successes inside Pakistan, thanks to his leadership. And in terms of the democracy issues, he's going to have to deal with it. And the interesting question is, is the issue about uniform, and he addressed that at the last—only time I've been in Pakistan. He said he would seriously consider—I don't want to put words—you'll have to pull up the press conference. 
The President. Well, democracy is—it's a lot more established in Pakistan than some of the other nations I mentioned. And there's upcoming elections. And what you're seeing is a lot of posturing about the election process, and it's not perfect. Neither was our democracy perfect for 100 years when we enslaved people. 

Remarks at a Rededication Ceremony at the Islamic Center of Washington
June 27, 2007
We have seen that friendship reflected in the outpouring of support Americans have extended to Muslim communities across the globe during times of war and natural disaster. Americans came to the aid of the victims of devastating earthquakes in Pakistan and Iran and responded with urgency and compassion to the wreckage of the tsunami in Indonesia and Malaysia. Our country defended Muslims in Bosnia and Kosovo after the breakup of Yugoslavia. Today, we are rallying the world to confront genocide in Sudan. Americans of all beliefs have undertaken these efforts out of compassion, conviction, and conscience.

Remarks to the Greater Cleveland Partnership and a Question-and-Answer Session in Cleveland, Ohio
July 10, 2007
The President. Pakistan, good. 
The President. Yes. 
The President. You're, like, in between a rock and a hard place, brother. I mean—— 
And so step one is to make it clear that we reject radical and extremism and murderers, not reject a great religion. Step two is to encourage people like you to go to Pakistan. You're more credible than I am amongst your pals there. You can say, "You're not going to believe America. You're not going to believe the country where people from all different backgrounds, all walks of life, can live in freedom." 
And I don't exaggerate to you, because the best diplomacy we have is when citizens travel overseas and/or people come here to America. One of the problems we faced when it came to diplomacy, public diplomacy, right after 9/11 is, we shut her down. You couldn't get in this country, particularly, perhaps if you were from Pakistan. I mean, this country said, "Whoa, we got a new world," and therefore, it was, stop a lot of student visas. You might remember, some of the kids that flew those airplanes were on—here as students. And we did what most Americans expected us to do— made sure we inventoried where we were so we could best protect the American people. 
But we've got a lot of work to do on that front. It's a great question. Pakistan, by the way, is a—Musharraf is a strong ally in the war against these extremists. I like him, and I appreciate him. I'm, of course, constantly working with him to make sure that democracy continues to advance in Pakistan. But he's been a valuable ally in rejecting extremists. And that's important, to cultivate those allies.

The President's News Conference
July 12, 2007
Elaine [Elaine Quijano, Cable News Network] asked the question, is it Al Qaida in Iraq? Yes, it is Al Qaida, just like it's Al Qaida in parts of Pakistan. And I'm working with President Musharraf to be able to—he doesn't want them in his country; he doesn't want foreign fighters in his outposts of his country. And so we're working to make sure that we continue to keep the pressure on Al Qaida.

Remarks on Presenting the Congressional Gold Medal to Norman E. Borlaug
July 17, 2007
Norm Borlaug's life has taken him from laboratories in America and Mexico to dusty villages throughout the developing world. He has consulted with Presidents and Prime Ministers in important countries like Pakistan and India. He's helped inspire students at Texas A&M, where an institute bearing his name is dedicated to completing his life's work. To this day Norman leads an active life—listen to a friend. He said, "Norman spends half his year in Texas, half his year in Mexico, and the other half wherever else he's needed." [Laughter] That is interesting math. I was going to say that I bet some of us wish we could use that kind of math during the budget process here in the Capitol. [Laughter] I'm afraid sometimes we do.

The President's Radio Address
July 21, 2007
The NIE report also cites some setbacks. One of the most troubling is its assessment that Al Qaida has managed to establish a safe haven in the tribal areas of Pakistan bordering Afghanistan. Last September, President Musharraf of Pakistan reached an agreement that gave tribal leaders more responsibility for policing their own areas. Unfortunately, tribal leaders were unwilling and unable to go after Al Qaida or the Taliban. 
President Musharraf recognizes the agreement has not been successful or well-enforced and is taking active steps to correct it. Earlier this month, he sent in Pakistani forces to go after radicals who seized control of a mosque, and then he delivered a speech vowing to rid all of Pakistan of extremism. Pakistani forces are in the fight, and many have given their lives. The United States supports them in these efforts. And we will work with our partners to deny safe haven to the Taliban and Al Qaida in Pakistan or anywhere else in the world. 


Remarks to the American Legislative Exchange Council in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
July 26, 2007
Now, there's a debate in Washington— I gave a speech about this in South Carolina the other day—is, well—is the Al Qaida in Iraq have anything to do with the Al Qaida that's hiding out somewhere in the regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan? There's some actually who say, "Well, they're different; they're not to be—we don't need to worry about them. All they care about is Iraq." Well, I reminded the audience in that speech that the person who started Al Qaida in Iraq was not an Iraqi; he was from Jordan. And after we killed him, the next person was not from Iraq, that started Al Qaida in Iraq; he was from Egypt.

The President's News Conference With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan at Camp David, Maryland
August 6, 2007
President Bush. I am confident that with actionable intelligence, we will be able to bring top Al Qaida to justice. We're in constant communications with the Pakistan Government. It's in their interest that foreign fighters be brought to justice. After all, these are the same ones who were plotting to kill President Musharraf. We share a concern. And I'm confident, with real, actionable intelligence, we will get the job done.

The President's News Conference
August 9, 2007
The President. You know, I've seen the reports of what they call an emergency declaration. I have seen no such evidence that he's made that decision. In my discussions with President Musharraf, I have reminded him that we share a common enemy, extremists and radicals who would like to do harm to our respective societies. In his case, they would like to kill him, and they've tried. 
I have made it clear to him that I would expect there to be full cooperation in sharing intelligence, and I believe we've got good intelligence sharing. I have indicated to him that the American people would expect there to be swift action taken if there is actionable intelligence on high-value targets inside his country. Now, I recognize Pakistan is a sovereign nation, and that's important for Americans to recognize that. But it's also important for Americans to understand that he shares the same concern about radicals and extremists as I do and as the American people do. 
So my focus in terms of the domestic scene there is that he have a free and fair election. And that's what we have been talking to him about, and I'm hopeful they will. 
To the question you asked and to my answer in Camp David, I said I'm confident that we—both the Paks and the Americans—will be able to work up a plan, based upon actionable intelligence, that will bring the top Al Qaida targets to justice. I meant what I said. We spend a lot of time with the leadership in Pakistan, talking about what we will do with actionable intelligence. And the question was, am I confident that they will be brought to justice? And my answer to you is, yes, I am confident.
The President. John, what's fair is, I'm not—what you must assume is that I'm not going to talk about ongoing intelligence matters

The President's Radio Address
August 11, 2007
Earlier this week, I had a good meeting with President Karzai of Afghanistan at Camp David. He updated me on the work his Government is doing to help build a more hopeful future for the Afghan people. He told me that senior officials and tribal leaders from Afghanistan and Pakistan are meeting to discuss how to deal with the extremists who are targeting both their countries. And he explained why he's confident that his Government will prevail against the Taliban remnants who continue to launch attacks throughout his country

Remarks at the Veterans of Foreign Wars National Convention in Kansas City, Missouri
August 22, 2007
There was another price to our withdrawal from Vietnam, and we can hear it in the words of the enemy we face in today's struggle, those who came to our soil and killed thousands of citizens on September the 11th, 2001. In an interview with a Pakistani newspaper after the 9/11 attacks, Usama bin Laden declared that "the American people had risen against their Government's war in Vietnam, and they must do the same today."

Remarks at the Iftaar Dinner
October 4, 2007
Americans have a history of standing with Muslims facing suffering and hardship, and it's a proud history. Our country defended Muslims in Bosnia and Kosovo after the breakup of Yugoslavia. We supported Kuwait after it was invaded by Saddam Hussein. Americans came to the aid of victims of devastating earthquakes in Pakistan, India, and Iran. Americans responded with urgency and compassion to the wreckage of the tsunami in Indonesia and Sri Lanka and Thailand. We're rallying the world to confront the genocide in Sudan and deliver humanitarian aid for those in dire need. And we support the establishment of a Palestinian democracy to live side by side with Israel in peace.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and an Exchange With Reporters
November 5, 2007
President Bush. As I said earlier in my statement, that we made it clear to the President that we would hope he wouldn't have declared the emergency powers he declared. Now that he's made that decision, I hope now that he hurry back to elections. And at the same time, we want to continue working with him to fight these terrorists and extremists who not only have tried to kill him but have used parts of his country from which to launch attacks into Afghanistan and/or are plotting attacks on America. 
President Bush. Once again, it's a hypothetical question. I certainly hope he does take my advice and the advice of the Prime Minister of Turkey and the advice of a lot of other figures. And so that's—all we can do is continue to work with the President, as well as others in the Pak Government, to make it abundantly clear the position of the United States. And then obviously, we'll deal with it if something other than that happens.

The President's News Conference With President Nicolas Sarkozy of France in Mount Vernon, Virginia
November 7, 2007
President Bush. I spoke to President Musharraf right before I came over here to visit with President Sarkozy. And my message was that we believe strongly in elections, and that you ought to have elections soon, and you need to take off your uniform. You can't be the President and the head of the military at the same time. So I had a very frank discussion with him. 
Look, our objective is the same in Burma as it is in Pakistan, and that is to promote democracy. There is a difference, however. Pakistan has been on the path to democracy; Burma hasn't been on the path to democracy. And it requires different tactics to achieve the common objective. 
And as I told you, I just spoke to President Musharraf before I came here. And my message was very, very plain, very easy to understand, and that is, the United States wants you to have the elections as scheduled and take your uniform off. 

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in Crawford
November 10, 2007
President Bush. First, on Al Qaida, we do share a common goal, and that is to eradicate Al Qaida. That goal obviously became paramount to the American people when Al Qaida killed 3,000 innocent souls on our soil. And since then, the United States of America, along with strong allies and friends, has been in pursuit of Al Qaida. 
I vowed to the American people we'd keep the pressure on them. I fully understand we need cooperation to do so, and one country that we need cooperation from is Pakistan. That cooperation has been made easier by the fact that Al Qaida has tried to kill leaders in Pakistan several times. And so we share a common goal. 
Secondly, we share a goal with the Pakistani people, and that is to live in a free society. I haven't spoken to President Musharraf since I did earlier this week, but he knows my position, and he knows the position of the U.S. Government. I do want to remind you that he has declared that he'll take off his uniform, and he has declared there will be elections, which are positive steps. 
We also believe that suspension of the emergency decree will make it easier for the democracy to flourish. And so our message is consistent and clear. Our message is also clear to Al Qaida: We will find you, and we'll bring you to justice before you can hurt innocent people. 
President Bush. Thank you, Steven Lee. I take a person for his word until otherwise. I think that's what you have to do. I mean, when somebody says this is what they're going to do, then you give them a chance to do it. I can tell you this, that President Musharraf, right after the attacks on September the 11th, made a decision, and the decision was to stand with the United States against the extremists inside Pakistan. In other words, he was given an option: Are you with us, or are you not with us? And he made a clear decision to be with us, and he's acted on that advice. 
I want to remind you that if you're the chief operating officer of Al Qaida, you haven't had a good experience. There has been four or five number-threes that have been brought to justice one way or the other. And many of those folks thought they could find safe haven in Pakistan. And that would not have happened without President Musharraf honoring his word. 
He fully understands the dangers of Al Qaida. Benazir Bhutto fully understands the dangers of Al Qaida. By far, the vast majority of people in Pakistan want to live in a free and peaceful society, and they understand the dangers of Al Qaida, because Al Qaida is a group of ideologues who murder innocent people to achieve their political objectives. 
And so I believe that we will continue to have good collaboration with the leadership in Pakistan. My concern is for the Pakistani democracy—for the sake of the Pakistani people, proceed as—back on track as quickly as possible. President Musharraf said that he would take off his uniform; he said there will be elections after the new year. And our hope is that he would suspend this emergency decree to allow this society, which is on the path to democracy, to get back on the path to democracy. 

Interview of the President and First Lady by ABC News' Charles Gibson
November 20, 2007
THE PRESIDENT: President Musharraf is, right after September the 11th, was asked whether he was with the United States or with the radicals and extremists who had come to kill our citizens. And he said, he's with you, he's been a loyal ally in fighting terrorists. 
He's also advanced democracy in Pakistan. He has, he has said he's going to take off his uniform, he's said there will be elections. Today he released prisoners, and so far I've found him to be a man of his word. 
And the fundamental question I have for President Musharraf is, will these elections be under emergency rule or law, because if they are, it's going to be hard for -- 
THE PRESIDENT: -- well, it'll be hard for those of us who, have belief that he's advanced Pakistan's democracy to, to say that's, that's still the case. So, we'll see. Things are unfolding in Pakistan. But he's been a strong ally of the United States, and I certainly hope he succeeds. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, he hasn't crossed the line. As a matter of fact, I don't think that, uh, he will cross any lines. I think he truly is somebody who believes in democracy. And he made a decision, we didn't necessarily agree with his decision, to impose emergency rule, and I, my, hopefully he'll get, get rid of the rule. Today I thought was a pretty good signal that he released thousands of people from jail. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, as I say, he has done more for Democracy in Pakistan than, than any modern leader has, and one of the reasons you're seeing the blowback that you're getting in Pakistan is because of the reforms that, that President Musharraf has put in place. Are we happy with the emergency rule? No, we're not. Do we, do I understand how important he is in fighting extremists and radicals? I do. And do I believe that he's going to end up getting Pakistan back on the road to democracy? I certainly hope so. 
THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, there is a difference in that, Pakistan has been on the road to democracy, Burma hadn't been. And um, I'm real proud of Laura's, she's learned that her voice can be pretty loud in international politics, and has really called the world's attention to the plight of Aung San Suu Kyi and the Burmese people. 
THE PRESIDENT: I certainly hope so. We feel pretty comfortable at this moment in time. And of course we'll pay very close attention to, to any, country that has got nuclear weapons. And, but yeah, I feel good about it right now. 

Remarks on Lighting the Hanukkah Menorah
December 10, 2007
The menorah we light tonight has special meaning. It once belonged to Chayim Pearl, who was the great-grandfather of Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl. While reporting in Pakistan in 2002, Daniel was kidnaped and murdered by terrorists. His only crime was being a Jewish American, something Daniel Pearl would never deny. In his final moments, Daniel told his captors about a street in Israel named for his great-grandfather. He looked into their camera, and he said, "My father is Jewish, my mother is Jewish, and I'm Jewish." These words have become a source of inspiration for Americans of all faiths. They show the courage of a man who refused to bow before terror and the strength of a spirit that could not be broken.

Remarks on the Death of Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto of Pakistan in Crawford, Texas
December 27, 2007
Laura and I extend our deepest condolences to the family of Benazir Bhutto, to her friends, and to her supporters. We send our condolences to the families of the others who were killed in today's violence. And we send our condolences to all the people of Pakistan on this tragic occasion. 
The United States strongly condemns this cowardly act by murderous extremists who are trying to undermine Pakistan's democracy. Those who committed this crime must be brought to justice. Mrs. Bhutto served her nation twice as Prime Minister, and she knew that her return to Pakistan earlier this year put her life at risk. Yet she refused to allow assassins to dictate the course of her country. 
We stand with the people of Pakistan in their struggle against the forces of terror and extremism. We urge them to honor Benazir Bhutto's memory by continuing with the democratic process for which she so bravely gave her life.

Interview With Nahum Barnea and Shimon Shiffer of Yedioth Ahronoth
January 2, 2008
I tell the American people all the time that Iraqi mothers want the same thing for their children that American mothers want for theirs, a place for their child to grow up and get a good education and be able to realize dreams. Same thing for the Palestinian mothers and the Israeli mothers. There's a commonality there, and yet, unfortunately, in the world in which we live today, there are people who simply do not like the idea of societies based upon the will of the people and will use violence to stop the advance of freedom. And it's not just in the Palestinian Territories that you find the violence, you find it in Lebanon, you find it in Iraq, you find it in Afghanistan, you find it in Pakistan.

The President's Radio Address
January 5, 2008
I know it is not always obvious why events in the nations of the Middle East should matter to the American people. But in the 21st century, developments there have a direct impact on our lives here. As we saw on September the 11th, 2001, dangers that arise on the other side of the world can bring death and destruction to our own streets. Since then, extremists have assassinated democratic leaders from Afghanistan to Lebanon to Pakistan. They have murdered innocent people from Saudi Arabia to Jordan and Iraq. They are seeking new weapons and new operatives so they can attack America again, overthrow governments in the Middle East, and impose their hateful vision on millions.

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on the State of the Union
January 28, 2008
In the past 7 years, we've also seen the images that have sobered us. We've watched throngs of mourners in Lebanon and Pakistan carrying the caskets of beloved leaders taken by the assassin's hand. We've seen wedding guests in blood-soaked finery staggering from a hotel in Jordan, Afghans and Iraqis blown up in mosques and markets, and trains in London and Madrid ripped apart by bombs. On a clear September day, we saw thousands of our fellow citizens taken from us in an instant. These horrific images serve as a grim reminder: The advance of liberty is opposed by terrorists and extremists, evil men who despise freedom, despise America, and aim to subject millions to their violent rule. 
We are engaged in the defining ideological struggle of the 21st century. The terrorists oppose every principle of humanity and decency that we hold dear. Yet in this war on terror, there is one thing we and our enemies agree on: In the long run, men and women who are free to determine their own destinies will reject terror and refuse to live in tyranny. And that is why the terrorists are fighting to deny this choice to the people in Lebanon, Iraq, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Palestinian Territories. And that is why, for the security of America and the peace of the world, we are spreading the hope of freedom.

The President's News Conference With President John Agyekum Kufuor of Ghana in Accra
February 20, 2008
There was a victory for the people of Pakistan, and that is, there were elections held that have been judged as being fair. And the people have spoken. I view that as a significant victory. I view it as a part of the victory in the war on terror. After all, ideologues can't stand--like these guys we're dealing with--can't stand free societies. That's why they try to kill innocent people. That's why they tried to intimidate people during the election process. 
And so I'm--I appreciate the fact that President Musharraf has done exactly that which he said he was going to do. He said he'd hold elections; he said he would get rid of his emergency law. And so it's now time for the newly elected folks to show up and form their Government. And the question then is, will they be friends of the United States? And I certainly hope so. 
We view Pakistan as an important ally. We've got common interests. We've got interests in dealing with radicals who killed Benazir Bhutto. We've got interests in helping to make sure there's no safe haven from which people can plot and plan attacks against the United States of America and Pakistan. And so that's my take on the elections. 

Remarks on the War on Terror in Arlington, Virginia
March 19, 2008
As our coalition fights the enemy in Iraq, we've stayed on the offensive on other fronts in the war on terror. You know, just a few weeks after commencing Operation Iraqi Freedom, U.S. forces captured Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the mastermind behind the September the 11th terrorist attacks; we got him in Pakistan. About the same time as we launched Operation Iraqi Freedom, coalition forces thousands of--hundreds of miles away launched an assault on the terrorists in the mountains of southern Afghanistan in an operation called Operation Valiant Strike.

Remarks on the War on Terror
April 10, 2008
Iraq is the convergence point for two of the greatest threats to America in this new century: Al Qaida and Iran. If we fail there, Al Qaida would claim a propaganda victory of colossal proportions, and they could gain safe havens in Iraq from which to attack the United States, our friends, and our allies. Iran would work to fill the vacuum in Iraq, and our failure would embolden its radical leaders and fuel their ambitions to dominate the region. The Taliban in Afghanistan and Al Qaida in Pakistan would grow in confidence and boldness. And violent extremists around the world would draw the same dangerous lesson they did from our retreats in Somalia and Vietnam. This would diminish our Nation's standing in the world and lead to massive humanitarian casualties and increase the threat of another terrorist attack on our homeland.

Remarks on the Observance of Asian Pacific American Heritage Month
May 1, 2008
We've put together what's called the Proliferation Security Initiative. It works with more than 85 countries, including many in the Asia-Pacific region, to stop the shipment of the world's most dangerous weapons. In other words, this is just kind of a quest for security and freedom. And we're working with nations all throughout the world, including those in the Asian-Pacific region, to protect our peoples from the true threats of the 21st century. We're working with Pakistan and Indonesia and Malaysia and the Philippines and other partners--and Singapore and other partners--to dismantle terrorist networks and to combat the ideology of the extremists.

The President's Radio Address
May 17, 2008
Our final stop is Egypt, where we are visiting the beautiful resort city of Sharm el-Sheikh. I am meeting with a number of key leaders from the region, including President Mubarak of Egypt, President Abbas of the Palestinian Authority, King Abdullah of Jordan, President Karzai of Afghanistan, Prime Minister Gilani of Pakistan, and several senior officials from Iraq's democracy.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Syed Yousuf Raza Gilani of Pakistan in Sharm el-Sheikh
May 18, 2008
President Bush. Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for coming. It's the first time we've had a chance to visit. I appreciate the very candid discussion we had. I appreciate the fact that you're committed to working to make sure that relations between the United States and Pakistan are strong and vibrant and productive. 
And one area where our relations can be productive is to cooperate on economic matters, because the truth of the matter is, in a population that has got hope as a result of being able to find work is a population that is going to make it harder for extremists and terrorists to find safe haven. 
And so I appreciate very much our candid discussion about the economy. I fully understand that you're dealing with serious food prices. I appreciate the compassion you showed for the people of Pakistan. I told the President--the Prime Minister that one thing we can do, having talked to the President of Afghanistan, is help Afghanistan grow wheat, help Afghanistan become self-sufficient, which will take the pressure off of the people of Pakistan. 
The Prime Minister and I talked, of course, about our common desire to protect ourselves and others from those who would do harm. And I want to thank your steadfast support and your strength of character and your understanding of the problems we face. Relations are good between our two countries, and they will continue to be good. And I want to thank you for coming and to--and advancing those relations. 

Remarks at a Groundbreaking Ceremony for the United States Institute of Peace
June 5, 2008
Secondly, there are nations like Colombia and Lebanon and Pakistan that are facing transnational threats from drug cartels or terrorist networks that seek safe haven on their territory and threaten to overwhelm their institutions

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Gordon Brown of the United Kingdom in London, England
June 16, 2008
President Bush. Our strategy is to deny safe haven to extremists who would do harm to innocent people. And that's the strategy of Afghanistan. It needs to be the strategy of Pakistan. It's in all our interests to prevent those who murder innocent people to achieve political objectives to gain safe haven. 
And so we'd look forward to working--I mean, one thing that can happen is, there can be, you know, more dialog between the Pak Government and the Afghan Government. Now, there was--in the past, they had a jirga amongst tribal leaders in the region on both--from both sides of the border that made a difference. And I think that would be a good idea to restart the jirga process. 
I know there needs to be dialog between the intel services between the respective countries. And I know there needs to be better cooperation, and there needs to be trilateral cooperation on the border--trilateral being Pak, Afghan, and coalition border patrols--to prevent people from coming back and forth across the border. 
And there's a lot of common ground. I repeat: It is in no one's interest that extremists have a safe haven from which to operate. And I'm, you know--I mean--and obviously, it's a testy situation there. And if I'm the President of a country and people are coming from one country to another--allegedly coming from one country to another--to kill innocent civilians on my side, I'd be concerned about it. But we can help. We can help calm the situation down and develop a strategy that will prevent these extremists from, you know, from developing safe haven and having freedom of movement. 

The President's News Conference
July 15, 2008
The President. First of all, we'll investigate his charge and we'll work with his service to get to the bottom of his allegation. No question, however, that some extremists are coming out of parts of Pakistan into Afghanistan. And that's troubling to us, it's troubling to Afghanistan, and it should be troubling to Pakistan. We share a common enemy. That would be extremists who use violence to either disrupt democracy or prevent democracy from taking hold. 
Al Qaida is--they're there. We have hurt Al Qaida hard--hit them hard, and hurt them in--around the world, including in Pakistan. And we will continue to keep the pressure on Al Qaida with our Pakistan friends. 
I certainly hope that the Government understands the dangers of extremists moving in their country. I think they do. As a matter of fact, we'll have an opportunity to explore that further on Monday with the Prime Minister of Pakistan. Pakistan is an ally; Pakistan is a friend. And I repeat: All three countries--United States, Pakistan, and Afghanistan--share a common enemy. 
I remember very well the meeting I had at the White House with President Musharraf and President Karzai. And we talked about the need for cross-border cooperation to prevent dangerous elements from training and coming into Afghanistan, and then, by the way, returning home with a skill level that could be used against the Government. 
And there was some hopeful progress made. Obviously, it's still a tough fight there. And we were heartened by the Provincial elections in that part of the world. We will continue to work to help the Government, on the one hand, deal with extremists; and on the other hand, have a counter--effective counterinsurgency strategy that uses aid to foster economic development. And it's a challenge. And the three of us working together can deal with the challenge a lot better than if we don't work together. 

Remarks on the President's Freedom Agenda
July 24, 2008
We've seen a hopeful beginning for the cause of liberty at the start of the 21st century. Over the last 7 years, we've seen the citizens in Afghanistan and Iraq emerge from tyranny to establish representative Governments. We've seen citizens in Georgia and Ukraine stand up for their right to free and fair elections. We've seen people in Lebanon take to the streets to demand their independence. We've seen strides toward democracy taken by nations such as Kuwait and Liberia, Mauritania and Morocco, and Pakistan.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Syed Yousuf Raza Gilani of Pakistan
July 28, 2008
President Bush. Mr. Prime Minister, welcome. It's been a very constructive morning. We've had a good meeting in the Oval Office. And then I'm going to have lunch with the Prime Minister here in the main White House. And that's fitting. After all, Pakistan is a strong ally and a vibrant democracy. And the United States supports the democracy and supports the sovereignty of Pakistan. 
We talked about areas of concern. Of course, we're going to spend a lot of time on the economy, about how the United States and Pakistan can continue to cooperate to--for economic benefits for all the people of Pakistan and for our own country, for that matter. And of course, we talked about the common threat we face: extremists who are very dangerous people. We talked about the need for us to make sure that the Afghan border is secure as best as possible. Pakistan's made a very strong commitment to that. I told the Prime Minister that the United States is committed to helping the Afghan democracy succeed, which is in Pakistan's interest. After all, the Prime Minister wants there to be a peaceful country on his border. 
The U.S., I repeat, respects the sovereignty of this democracy. And we also appreciate the Prime Minister's strong words against the extremists and terrorists who not only would do us harm but have harmed people inside Pakistan. 

Remarks at the National Defense University
September 9, 2008
These were important successes. Yet, the enemies of a free Afghanistan refused to give up the fight. They sought to undermine the democratic government so they could regain the place of dominance they enjoyed in Afghanistan before September the 11th. With the help of their sanctuary in Pakistan, they ruthlessly attack innocent Afghans across the country.
As we take these new steps in Afghanistan, we must also help the Government of Pakistan defeat Taliban and Al Qaida fighters hiding in remote border regions of their country. These extremists are increasingly using Pakistan as a base from which to destabilize Afghanistan's young democracy. In the past year, the Taliban, Al Qaida, and other extremist groups operating in these remote regions have stepped up their attacks against the Pakistani Government, hoping to stop that country's democratic progress as well. 
This morning I called Pakistan's newly elected leader, President Zardari. I pledged the full support of America's Government as Pakistan takes the fight to the terrorists and extremists in the border regions. 
Defeating these terrorist and extremists is in Pakistan's interest, they pose a mortal threat to Pakistan's future as a free and democratic nation. Defeating these terrorist and extremists is also Pakistan's responsibility, because every nation has an obligation to govern its own territory and make certain that it does not become a safe haven for terror. America and our NATO allies will continue helping Pakistan in its efforts to defeat the extremists. The same terrorists who murdered innocent civilians in Karachi and Islamabad are plotting new attacks against the United States and Europe. 
Each of these three places I've discussed today--Iraq, Afghanistan, and parts of Pakistan--pose unique challenges for our country. Yet, they're all theaters in the same overall struggle. In all three places, extremists are using violence and terror in an attempt to impose their ideology on whole populations. They murder to impose their dark vision of the world. In all three places, America is standing strongly with brave elected leaders and determined reformers and millions of ordinary citizens who seek a future of liberty and justice and tolerance. 

Remarks During a Meeting With President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan in New York City
September 23, 2008
President Bush. Mr. President, I thank you for coming. And I have really been looking forward to this meeting; after all, Pakistan is a close and important friend. 
First of all, I want to express our deepest condolences to the victims of those who died as a result of the terrorist attack in Islamabad. I know that you--your heart went out to the families of those who suffer and so does the collective heart of the American people; we stand with you. 
President Bush. Secondly, I got to know you a little bit in an interesting way when I met your children at the Olympics. And it reminded me about the great suffering that they and you have been through with the loss of your beloved wife. And I thank you very much for staying involved in public service to honor her legacy. 
Pakistan is an ally, and I look forward to deepening our relationship. We'll be discussing, of course, how to help spread prosperity. We want our friends around the world to be making a good living. We want there to be economic prosperity, and we can work together, and of course, we'll be talking about security. And your words have been very strong about Pakistan's sovereign right and sovereign duty to protect your country, and the United States wants to help. 

Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 2008
The brutal nature of the extremists increasingly clear, the coalition of nations confronting terror is growing stronger. Over the past 7 years, Afghanistan and Iraq have been transformed from regimes that actively sponsored terror to democracies that fight terror. Libya has renounced its support for terror and its pursuit of nuclear weapons. Nations like Saudi Arabia and Pakistan are actively pursuing the terrorists. A few nations--regimes like Syria and Iran--continue to sponsor terror. Yet their numbers are growing fewer, and they're growing more isolated from the world.

Remarks at the United States Military Academy at West Point in West Point, New York
December 9, 2008
One of the most important challenges we will face, and you will face, in the years ahead is helping our partners assert control over ungoverned spaces. This problem is most pronounced in Pakistan, where areas along the Afghanistan border are home to Taliban and to Al Qaida fighters. The Pakistani Government and people understand the threat, because they have been victims of terror themselves. They're working to enforce the law and fight terror in the border areas. And our government is providing strong support for these efforts. And at the same time, we have made it clear to Pakistan, and to all our partners, that we will do what is necessary to protect American troops and the American people.
The results of these efforts are unfolding slowly and unevenly, but there are encouraging signs. From Iraq and Afghanistan to Lebanon and Pakistan, voters defied the terrorists to cast their ballots in free elections. In places like Iraq's Anbar Province, people have seen what life under the Taliban looks like, and they decided they want no part it--actually, it was life under Al Qaida looks like.

Interview With Members of the White House Press Pool
December 14, 2008
The President. Obviously, if Pakistan is a place from which people feel comfortable attacking infrastructure, citizens, troops, then it's still going--it's going to make it difficult to succeed in Afghanistan. That's why we're working with the Pakistan Government to keep the pressure on the extremists. And the more that we can get Pakistan and Afghanistan to cooperate, the easier it will be to enforce that part of the border region. 
The President. Well, first of all, the first question is, is there a determination----
President Zardari is determined; he's said so publicly, and he's said so to me privately. He looked at me in the eye and said, "You don't need to talk to me about extremist violence; after all, my wife got killed by extremists." Like a lot of other situations in which you're trying to deal with extremists who get embedded in the population, there are two aspects: one is to pressure them and to bring them to justice; and simultaneously, try to win the hearts and minds of the local folks, which is what is happening Iraq. 
The President. That's the press--find them and get them, press them hard, and then win the hearts and minds of the locals through economic development. 
The President. Well, as you know--you know very well that when it comes to certain matters, the U.S. Government doesn't discuss operations. 

The President's News Conference With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan in Kabul, Afghanistan
December 15, 2008
I expect you'll see more U.S. troops here as quickly as possible in parts of the country that are being challenged by the Taliban. I remember when President Karzai and President Musharraf and I had the famous dinner at the White House. And it--you know, the discussions really are the same today as they were then, and that is that extremists and terrorists and people who use car bombs and suicide bombers to achieve political objectives are a threat to all of us. And that there needs to be a comprehensive strategy in helping the Pakistan Government deal with those who bring great harm on their citizens and bring harm on the citizens of Afghanistan. 
So to answer your question, I think it's a--we need to have a collaborative strategy. We need to work together in a constructive way. And we are making progress along those lines. You know, I was with President Zardari in--I think it was in New York. And I had never met him before, and I was reminding him that I'm, you know, a person who says that we will defend our country and defend our people. The most important job for the President of the United States is defend our people from attack. 
He said, "You don't have to talk to me about extremists attacking people, extremists killed my wife." And so we're--there's a lot of consultations going on with the President--I think you're going to be meeting with President Zardari soon. 

Remarks at the United States Army War College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania
December 17, 2008
We will leave behind a strong coalition of more than 90 nations--composing almost half the world--who have committed to combating terror and sharing intelligence and keeping our citizens safe. This coalition includes Saudi Arabia, the nation that produced 15 of the 9/11 hijackers and now serves as a staunch ally in the war on terror. This coalition includes Pakistan, a country that was a supporter of the Taliban before September the 11th and today is a strong partner of the United States. This coalition includes two of America's newest and most courageous friends, the free nations of Afghanistan and Iraq. This coalition includes members of the new Proliferation Security Initiative and the new Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, who are working to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction.

Remarks on Presenting the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the Department of State
January 15, 2009
When the American Embassy in Kabul reopened in the beginning of 2002, Ryan Crocker was our first envoy. When we liberated Iraq and removed the thug Saddam Hussein from power in 2003, I sent Ryan to help lead the reconstruction efforts. When the American Embassy in Pakistan needed new leadership, Ryan Crocker was put in charge. In 2007, I asked Ryan to return for a final mission to Iraq as America's Ambassador.

Remarks at the State Department
January 22, 2009
Another urgent threat to global security is the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan. This is the central front in our enduring struggle against terrorism and extremism. There, as in the Middle East, we must understand that we cannot deal with our problems in isolation. There is no answer in Afghanistan that does not confront the Al Qaida and Taliban bases along the border, and there will be no lasting peace unless we expand spheres of opportunity for the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan. This is truly an international challenge of the highest order. 
That's why Secretary Clinton and I are naming Ambassador Richard Holbrooke to be Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan. Ambassador Holbrooke is one of the most talented diplomats of his generation. Over several decades, he served on different continents and as an outstanding Ambassador to the United Nations. He has strengthened ties with our allies, tackled the toughest negotiations, and helped deliver a hard-earned peace as an architect of the Dayton Accords. He will help lead our effort to forge and implement a strategic and sustainable approach to this critical region. 
The American people and the international community must understand that the situation is perilous and progress will take time. Violence is up dramatically in Afghanistan. A deadly insurgency has taken deep root. The opium trade is far and away the largest in the world. The Afghan Government has been unable to deliver basic services. Al Qaida and the Taliban strike from bases embedded in rugged, tribal terrain along the Pakistani border. And while we have yet to see another attack on our soil since 9/11, Al Qaida terrorists remain at large and remain plotting. 
Going forward, we must set clear priorities in pursuit of achievable goals that contribute to our collective security. My administration is committed to refocusing attention and resources on Afghanistan and Pakistan and to spending those resources wisely. And that's why we are pursuing a careful review of our policy. We will seek stronger partnerships with the governments of the region, sustained cooperation with our NATO allies, deeper engagement with the Afghan and Pakistani people, and a comprehensive strategy to combat terror and extremism. We will provide the strategic guidance to meet our objectives. And we pledge to support the extraordinary Americans serving in Afghanistan, both military and civilian, with the resources that they need. 

Interview with Hisham Melhem of Al Arabiya
January 27, 2009
I do think that it is impossible for us to think only in terms of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and not think in terms of what's happening with Syria or Iran or Lebanon or Afghanistan and Pakistan. 

Interview With Matt Lauer of NBC's "Today"
February 1, 2009
The President. What we can do is make sure that Afghanistan is not a safe haven for Al Qaida. What we can do is make sure that it is not destabilizing neighboring Pakistan, which has nuclear weapons. And that's going to require not only military efforts, but also diplomatic efforts. It's also going to require development efforts in a coordinated fashion. And that's why I've asked the Joint Chiefs that have produced a review. David Petraeus is reviewing the situation there. We assigned Richard Holbrooke as a special envoy to the region. They are all working together. They will be presenting to me a plan.

The President's News Conference
February 9, 2009
In addition, you've got the Taliban and Al Qaida operating in the FATA and these border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, and what we haven't seen is the kind of concerted effort to root out those safe havens that would ultimately make our mission successful.
The President. Well, I think that Pakistan--there is no doubt that in the FATA region of Pakistan, in the mountainous regions along the border of Afghanistan, that there are safe havens where terrorists are operating. And one of the goals of Ambassador Holbrooke, as he is traveling throughout the region, is to deliver a message to Pakistan that they are endangered as much as we are by the continuation of those operations. And that we've got to work in a regional fashion to root out those safe havens. It's notacceptable for Pakistan or for us to have folks who, with impunity, will kill innocent men, women, and children. And I believe that the new Government of Pakistan and Mr. Zardari cares deeply about getting control of this situation. And we want to be effective partners with them on that issue. 
The President. Well, Mr. Holbrooke is there, and that's exactly why he is being sent there, because I think that we have to make sure that Pakistan is a stalwart ally with us in battling this terrorist threat. 

Interview With Peter Mansbridge of Canadian Broadcasting Corporation
February 17, 2009
If you've got narcotrafficking that is funding the Taliban, if there is a perception that there's no rule of law in Afghanistan, if we don't solve the issue of the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan, then we're probably not going to solve the problem.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada in Ottawa, Canada
February 19, 2009
There is an enduring military mission against Al Qaida and the Taliban in Afghanistan and along the border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, but we also have to enhance our diplomacy and our development efforts. And we discussed this in our private meetings. My administration is undertaking a review of our policy so that we forge a comprehensive strategy in pursuit of clear and achievable goals. And as we move forward, we intend to consult very closely with the Government here in Canada to make certain that all our partners are working in the same direction.

Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress
February 24, 2009
And with our friends and allies, we will forge a new and comprehensive strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan to defeat Al Qaida and combat extremism, because I will notallow terrorists to plot against the American people from safe havens halfway around the world. We will notallow it.

Interview With Master Sergeant Rusty Barfield of the Pentagon Channel
February 27, 2009
The key, though, is to understand that we are not going to win in Afghanistan or get an acceptable outcome in Afghanistan if we're only dependent on our military. Our military does everything that's asked of them, but anybody who knows the region knows that if we don't have a Afghan Government that can deliver for its people, if we don't have an economic development strategy where farmers don't have to grown heroin poppy but instead can grow other crops so that they're not feeding narcoterrorism, if we don't have Pakistan providing us support on the other side of the border that cleans out some of these areas where Al Qaida and the Taliban are using as safe havens, then this isn't going to work. 
And my goal is to have a comprehensive strategy of not just force, but also diplomacy and development that is all moving in concert to get the kind of outcome we want. 

Remarks on Military Operations in Iraq at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina
February 27, 2009
We've also taken into account the simple reality that America can no longer afford to see Iraq in isolation from other priorities. We face the challenge of refocusing on Afghanistan and Pakistan, of relieving the burden of our military and military families, of rebuilding our struggling economy. These are challenges that we must meet and will meet
This reflects a fundamental truth: We can no longer deal with regional challenges in isolation. We need a smarter, more sustainable, and comprehensive approach. That is why we are renewing our diplomacy, while relieving the burden on our military. That is why we are refocusing on Al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan, developing a strategy to use all elements of American power to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, and actively seeking a lasting peace between Israel and the Arab world. And that is why we have named three of America's most accomplished diplomats--George Mitchell, Dennis Ross, and Richard Holbrooke--to support Secretary Hillary Clinton and myself as we carry forward this agenda.

Interview with Jim Lehrer on PBS' the "News Hour"
February 27, 2009
Obviously, we haven't been thinking regionally, recognizing that Afghanistan is actually an Afghanistan/Pakistan problem, because right now the militants, the extremists who are attacking U.S. troops are often times coming over the border from Pakistan.
Now, we've had a long debate about the wisdom of having gone into Iraq in the first place, I don't want to re-litigate that. But just objectively, there's no doubt that had we stayed more focused on Afghanistan and the problems there -- and had we thought through more effectively Pakistan and its role in this whole process of dealing with extremists -- that we would probably be further along now than we are. But, you know, that's history.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Gordon Brown of the United Kingdom and an Exchange With Reporters
March 3, 2009
President Obama. Well, the details are still coming in, and so I don't want to be too specific. 
President Obama. Well, obviously, we're deeply concerned. But let me just make a general statement: Both Great Britain and the United States share a deep interest in ensuring that neither Afghanistan nor Pakistan are safe havens for terrorist activity. 
And we have coordinated effectively in the past. But the truth is, is that the situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated. The safe havens for Al Qaida remain in the frontier regions of Pakistan. And we are conducting currently a comprehensive review of our policies with respect to Afghanistan, with respect to Pakistan, our coordination with our NATO allies and other members of the international security forces that are there. I will be making a series of announcements prior to the NATO summit that immediately follows the G-20 summit, in terms of the direction that the United States would like to go. 

Remarks at the National Defense University
March 12, 2009
From this fort, which was founded to defend the city of Washington against invasion, you could stand on September 11, 2001, and watch the smoke from the Pentagon billowing up across the Potomac. The attacks of 9/11 signaled the new dangers of the 21st century. And today, our people are still threatened by violent extremists, and we're still at war with terrorists in Afghanistan and Pakistan who are plotting to do us harm.

Interview with Steve Kroft on CBS News' "60 Minutes"
March 22, 2009
THE PRESIDENT: Making sure that al Qaeda cannot attack the U.S. homeland and U.S. interests and our allies. That's our number one priority. And in service of that priority there may be a whole host of things that we need to do. We may need to build up economic capacity in Afghanistan. We may need to improve our diplomatic efforts in Pakistan.
Is Iraq was actually easier than Afghanistan. It's easier terrain. You've got a much better educated population, infrastructure to build off of. You don't have some of the same destabilizing border issues that you have between Afghanistan and Pakistan. And so this is going to be a tough nut to crack. But it is notacceptable for us to simply sit back and let safe havens of terrorists plan and plot

Remarks on United States Military and Diplomatic Strategies for Afghanistan and Pakistan
March 27, 2009
Today I'm announcing a comprehensive, new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan. And this marks the conclusion of a careful policy review, led by Bruce, that I ordered as soon as I took office. My administration has heard from our military commanders as well as our diplomats. We've consulted with the Afghan and Pakistani Governments, with our partners and our NATO allies, and with other donors and international organizations. We've also worked closely with Members of Congress here at home. And now I'd like to speak clearly and candidly to the American people. 
The situation is increasingly perilous. It's been more than 7 years since the Taliban was removed from power, yet war rages on and insurgents control parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan. Attacks against our troops, our NATO allies, and the Afghan Government have risen steadily. And most painfully, 2008 was the deadliest year of the war for American forces. 
So let me be clear: Al Qaida and its allies, the terrorists who planned and supported the 9/11 attacks, are in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Multiple intelligence estimates have warned that Al Qaida is actively planning attacks on the United States homeland from its safe haven in Pakistan. And if the Afghan Government falls to the Taliban or allows Al Qaida to go unchallenged, that country will again be a base for terrorists who want to kill as many of our people as they possibly can. 
The future of Afghanistan is inextricably linked to the future of its neighbor Pakistan. In the nearly 8 years since 9/11, Al Qaida and its extremist allies have moved across the border to the remote areas of the Pakistani frontier. This almost certainly includes Al Qaida's leadership, Usama bin Laden and Ayman Al-Zawahiri. They have used this mountainous terrain as a safe haven to hide, to train terrorists, to communicate with followers, to plot attacks, and to send fighters to support the insurgency in Afghanistan. For the American people, this border region has become the most dangerous place in the world. 
But this is not simply an American problem--far from it--it is, instead, an international security challenge of the highest order. Terrorist attacks in London and Bali were tied to Al Qaida and its allies in Pakistan, as were attacks in North Africa and the Middle East, in Islamabad and in Kabul. If there is a major attack on an Asian, European, or African city, it too is likely to have ties to Al Qaida's leadership in Pakistan. The safety of people around the world is at stake. 
As President, my greatest responsibility is to protect the American people. We are not in Afghanistan to control that country or to dictate its future. We are in Afghanistan to confront a common enemy that threatens the United States, our friends and our allies, and the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan who have suffered the most at the hands of violent extremists. 
So I want the American people to understand that we have a clear and focused goal to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida in Pakistan and Afghanistan and to prevent their return to either country in the future. That's the goal that must be achieved; that is a cause that could not be more just. And to the terrorists who oppose us, my message is the same: We will defeat you. 
To achieve our goals, we need a stronger, smarter, and comprehensive strategy. To focus on the greatest threat to our people, America must no longer deny resources to Afghanistan because of the war in Iraq. To enhance the military, governance, and economic capacity of Afghanistan and Pakistan, we have to marshal international support. And to defeat an enemy that heeds no borders or laws of war, we must recognize the fundamental connection between the future of Afghanistan and Pakistan, which is why I've appointed Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, who is here, to serve as Special Representative for both countries and to work closely with General Petraeus to integrate our civilian and military efforts. 
Let me start by addressing the way forward in Pakistan. The United States has great respect for the Pakistani people. They have a rich history and have struggled against long odds to sustain their democracy. The people of Pakistan want the same things that we want: an end to terror, access to basic services, the opportunity to live their dreams, and the security that can only come with the rule of law. The single greatest threat to that future comes from Al Qaida and their extremist allies, and that is why we must stand together. 
The terrorists within Pakistan's borders are not simply enemies of America or Afghanistan, they are a grave and urgent danger to the people of Pakistan. Al Qaida and other violent extremists have killed several thousand Pakistanis since 9/11. They've killed many Pakistani soldiers and police. They assassinated Benazir Bhutto. They've blown up buildings, derailed foreign investment, and threatened the stability of the state. So make no mistake: Al Qaida and its extremist allies are a cancer that risks killing Pakistan from within. 
It's important for the American people to understand that Pakistan needs our help in going after Al Qaida. This is no simple task. The tribal regions are vast, they are rugged, and they are often ungoverned. And that's why we must focus our military assistance on the tools, training, and support that Pakistan needs to root out the terrorists. And after years of mixed results, we will not, and cannot, provide a blank check. Pakistan must demonstrate its commitment to rooting out Al Qaida and the violent extremists within its borders. And we will insist that action be taken, one way or another, when we have intelligence about high-level terrorist targets. 
The Government's ability to destroy these safe havens is tied to its own strength and security. To help Pakistan weather the economic crisis, we must continue to work with the IMF, the World Bank, and other international partners. To lessen tensions between two nuclear-armed nations that too often teeter on the edge of escalation and confrontation, we must pursue constructive diplomacy with both India and Pakistan. To avoid the mistakes of the past, we must make clear that our relationship with Pakistan is grounded in support for Pakistan's democratic institutions and the Pakistani people. And to demonstrate through deeds as well as words a commitment that is enduring, we must stand for lasting opportunity. 
A campaign against extremism will not succeed with bullets or bombs alone. Al Qaidas offers the people of Pakistan nothing but destruction. We stand for something different. So today I am calling upon Congress to pass a bipartisan bill cosponsored by John Kerry and Richard Lugar that authorizes $1.5 billion in direct support to the Pakistani people every year over the next 5 years, resources that will build schools and roads and hospitals and strengthen Pakistan's democracy. I'm also calling on Congress to pass a bipartisan bill cosponsored by Maria Cantwell, Chris Van Hollen, and Peter Hoekstra that creates opportunity zones in the border regions to develop the economy and bring hope to places plagued with violence. And we will ask our friends and allies to do their part, including at the donors conference in Tokyo next month. 
I don't ask for this support lightly. These are challenging times; resources are stretched. But the American people must understand that this is a downpayment on our own future, because the security of America and Pakistan is shared. Pakistan's Government must be a stronger partner in destroying these safe havens, and we must isolate Al Qaida from the Pakistani people. And these steps in Pakistan are also indispensable to our efforts in Afghanistan, which will see no end to violence if insurgents move freely back and forth across the border. 
Security demands a new sense of shared responsibility. And that's why we will launch a standing, trilateral dialog among the United States, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. Our nations will meet regularly, with Secretaries Clinton and Secretary Gates leading our effort. Together, we must enhance intelligence sharing and military cooperation along the border, while addressing issues of common concern like trade, energy, and economic development. 
At a time of economic crisis, it's tempting to believe that we can shortchange this civilian effort. But make no mistake: Our efforts will fail in Afghanistan and Pakistan if we don't invest in their future. And that's why my budget includes indispensable investments in our State Department and foreign assistance programs. These investments relieve the burden on our troops. They contribute directly to security. They make the American people safer. And they save us an enormous amount of money in the long run, because it's far cheaper to train a policeman to secure his or her own village than to help a farmer seed a crop--or to help a farmer seed a crop than it is to send our troops to fight tour after tour of duty with no transition to Afghan responsibility. 
And finally, together with the United Nations, we will forge a new contact group for Afghanistan and Pakistan that brings together all who should have a stake in the security of the region, our NATO allies and other partners, but also the Central Asian states, the Gulf nations and Iran, Russia, India, and China. None of these nations benefit from a base for Al Qaida terrorists and a region that descends into chaos. All have a stake in the promise of lasting peace and security and development. 
I remind everybody, the United States of America did not choose to fight a war in Afghanistan. Nearly 3,000 of our people were killed on September 11, 2001, for doing nothing more than going about their daily lives. Al Qaida and its allies have since killed thousands of people in many countries. Most of the blood on their hands is the blood of Muslims, who Al Qaida has killed and maimed in far greater number than any other people. That is the future that Al Qaida is offering to the people of Pakistan and Afghanistan, a future without hope or opportunity, a future without justice or peace. 
So understand, the road ahead will be long and there will be difficult days ahead. But we will seek lasting partnerships with Afghanistan and Pakistan that promise a new day for their people. And we will use all elements of our national power to defeat Al Qaida and to defend America, our allies, and all who seek a better future. Because the United States of America stands for peace and security, justice and opportunity. That is who we are, and that is what history calls on us to do once more. 

Interview with Bob Schieffer on CBS News' "Face the Nation"
March 29, 2009
In order for us to do that, we have to ensure that neither Afghanistan nor Pakistan can serve as a safe haven for al Qaeda. And, unfortunately, over the last several years what we've seen is, essentially, al Qaeda moving several miles from Afghanistan to Pakistan, but effectively still able to project their violence and hateful ideologies out into the world. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, I haven't changed my approach. If we have a high-value target within our sights, after consulting with Pakistan, we're going after them. 
But, our main thrust has to be to help Pakistan defeat these extremists. Now, one of the concerns that we've had building up over the last several years is a notion, I think, among the average Pakistani that this is somehow America's war, and that they are not invested. And that attitude, I think, has led to a steady creep of extremism in Pakistan that is the greatest threat to the stability of the Pakistan government and, ultimately, the greatest threat to the Pakistani people. 
What we want to do is say to the Pakistani people, "You are our friends. You are our allies. We are going to give you the tools to defeat al Qaeda and to root out these safe havens. But, we also expect some accountability, and we expect that you understand the severity and the nature of the threat." In addition, what we want to do is to help Pakistan grow its economy, to be able to provide basic services to its people. 
And that, I think, will help strengthen those efforts. If the Pakistan government doesn't have credibility, if they are weakened, then it's going to be much more difficult for them to deal with the extremism within their borders. 
THE PRESIDENT: No. 
THE PRESIDENT: No. Our plan does not change a recognition of Pakistan as a sovereign government. We need to work with them, and through them, to deal with al Qaeda -- but, we have to hold them much more accountable. And, we have to recognize that part of our task in working with Pakistan is not just military, it's also our capacity to build their capacity, through civilian interventions, through development, through aid assistance. 
And that's part of what you're seeing both in Afghanistan and Pakistan, I think is fully resourcing a comprehensive strategy that doesn't just rely on bullets or bombs, but also relies on agricultural specialists, on doctors, on engineers to help create an environment in which people recognize that they have much more at stake in partnering with us, and the international community, than giving in to some of these -- 
THE PRESIDENT: -- extremist ideologies. 
THE PRESIDENT: Well, some of -- 
THE PRESIDENT: -- some of those reports aren't new. There are a whole host of contingencies that we've got to deal with. I mean, this is going to be hard, Bob. I'm under no illusions. If it was easy it would have already been completed. 
And so we're going to have to go with a strategy that is focused, that is narrowly targeted on defeating al Qaeda. We think that if you combine military, civilian, diplomatic, development approaches; if we are doing a much better job of coordinating with our allies, that we can be successful. 
But, we recognize there are going to be a lot of hurdles between now and us finally having weakened al Qaeda, or destroyed al Qaeda to the point they're -- it cannot, it doesn't pose danger to us. And we will continue to monitor and adjust our strategies to make sure that we're not just going down blind allies.
THE PRESIDENT: What I will not do is to simply assume that more troops always results in an improved situation. I think there was a good argument, after us scrubbing this very hard, and talking to a lot of our allies in the region -- including the Pakistan and Afghanistan governments, the European and our other NATO Allies, that this was the best strategy. 
We've got to also make sure that our civilian efforts -- our diplomatic efforts and our development efforts, are just as robustly encouraged. And so, for example, in the budget that I've presented to Congress I've said we've got to increase foreign aid in Afghanistan and we've got to increase foreign aid Pakistan. And I'm going to be really pushing Congress -- because sometimes foreign aid is a, you know, juicy target, particularly during tough times -- I'm going to tell them this is central to our strategy and it can save lives and troops if we properly execute it. 

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Gordon Brown of the Untied Kingdom in London, England
April 1, 2009
The Prime Minister and I also covered several other areas of challenge that are fundamental to our common security and prosperity. As he mentioned, we discussed my administration's review of strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan, a review that benefited greatly from the consultations with our allies. 
The city of London, like the United States, was attacked by the Al Qaida terrorists who are still plotting in Pakistan, and we arecommitted to a focused effort to defeat them. And I want to repeat something that I said during our last visit together: I want to honor the British troops, and their families, who are serving alongside our own on behalf of our common security. 
We also discussed the progress that was made yesterday at The Hague, where more than 70 nations gathered to discuss our mutual responsibilities to partner with the Afghan people so that we can deny Al Qaida a safe haven. And in the days ahead, we'll consult further with our NATO allies about training Afghan security forces, increasing our civilian support, and a regional approach that recognizes the connection between the future of Afghanistan and Pakistan. 

The President's News Conference in London
April 2, 2009
We did discuss the issue of terrorism. And we discussed it not simply in terms of terrorism emanating from Pakistan, although, obviously, we are very concerned about extremists and terrorists who have made camp in the border regions of Pakistan as well as in Afghanistan. But we spoke about it more broadly in terms of how we can coordinate effectively on issues of counterterrorism. 
We also spoke about the fact that in a nuclear age, at a time when perhaps the greatest enemy of both India and Pakistan should be poverty, that it may make sense to create a more effective dialog between India and Pakistan. But obviously, we didn't go in depth into those issues. 

Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and a Question-and-Answer Session in Strasbourg
April 3, 2009
So I understand that there is doubt about this war in Europe. There's doubt at times even in the United States. But know this: The United States of America did not choose to fight a war in Afghanistan. We were attacked by an Al Qaida network that killed thousands on American soil, including French and Germans. Along the border of Afghanistan and Pakistan, those terrorists are still plotting today. And they're--if there is another Al Qaida attack, it is just as likely, if not more, that it will be here in Europe, in a European city.
So here's the bottom line. The United States has reviewed and redesigned its approach to Afghanistan. We believe that we cannot just win militarily. We have to win through development aid. We have to win through increasing the capacity of the Afghan Government to provide basic services to its people and to uphold rule of law. We have to work with the Pakistani Government so that they are more trusted by their population and have more control so that they can then go--help us go after these terrorists. We have to encourage diplomacy in the region.

The President's News Conference With President Nicolas Sarkozy of France in Strasbourg, France
April 3, 2009
Now, just one last thing I want to say. I think that France has already been a stalwart ally when it comes to Afghanistan. So we discussed the possibilities of all the NATO allies reengaging in a more effective mission in Afghanistan, which is military, diplomatic, deals with the development needs of both Pakistan and India. So it's not just a matter of more resources, it's also a matter of more effectively using the resources we have.

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in Baden-Baden, Germany
April 3, 2009
And obviously, we already have one test case, and that is in Afghanistan. It is as complex a problem as we're going to see, partly because it's not just a problem of Afghanistan, but it's also a problem that exists in Pakistan. We've put forward a new comprehensive review of how we think we should approach this that recognizes the military alone cannot solve these problems, that we have to have a significant military force, but that it has to be combined with a diplomatic effort and development effort that can stabilize the region, and it has to be focused on the true problem, which is violent extremists that can project attacks not just against the United States but also against Europe and worldwide.
President Obama. So I'll make this one quick. No, my focus on Pakistan does not envision NATO troops activities in Pakistan. It does mean that U.S. and NATO partners have to work more effectively with Pakistan to enable them to root out the safe havens for extremists that pose not just a danger to us, but now pose an extraordinary danger to Pakistan. 
That is going to be a very complex task. It's going to have a lot of facets to it. The more diplomatic resources that we bring to that, the more countries can assist Pakistan in its development efforts, the more effectively we can provide training for a different type of conflict than the one that Pakistan has traditionally prepared for, those are all areas where I think NATO can work together very effectively. And we need to--we can't, ultimately, I believe, be effective in Afghanistan if we have not addressed the problems across the border. 

The President's News Conference in Strasbourg
April 4, 2009
Seven years later, Al Qaida is active in the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. These terrorists threaten every member of NATO. They've struck in both Europe and North America. They are plotting new attacks, and that's why my administration undertook a comprehensive review of our strategy. We listened carefully, and we consulted closely with our allies. And today I briefed them on the results and discussed how we might move forward together. 
We start from a simple premise: For years, our efforts in Afghanistan have lacked the resources needed to achieve our goals. And that's why the United States has recommitted itself to a clear and focused goal to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan and to prevent their return to either country in the future. 
With respect to what we wanted here in NATO, the first thing we wanted was consensus and unity around a refocused approach to Afghanistan. And because of careful consultation with our allies prior to releasing the results of our strategic review, we came here expecting consensus and were gratified to receive that consensus. You had NATO putting its stamp of approval on what I believe is a well-thought-out, hard-headed strategy and approach to Afghanistan, but also the need to deal with the interaction between Afghanistan and Pakistan.
With respect to Pakistan, we want to bring all of our diplomatic and development skills to bear on strengthening Pakistan in part because they have to have the capacity to take on Al Qaida within their borders, but also because to the extent that we strengthen Pakistan's ability to deliver goods and services and a better life for its people, then the less the contagion of extremism in that country or in the region is likely to spread. 
And I informed our allies here today that we are going to, despite difficult budget circumstances, put more money into aid to Pakistan, conditioned on some concrete results in dealing with the terrorist threat. And we are going to be pushing our allies to participate, for example, in the donors forum for Pakistan that's going to be taking place. 

Remarks to the Grand National Assembly of Turkey in Ankara
April 6, 2009
Now, finally, we share the common goal of denying Al Qaida a safe haven in Pakistan or Afghanistan. The world has come too far to let this region backslide and to let Al Qaida terrorists plot further attacks. And that's why we arecommitted to a more focused effort to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida. That is why we are increasing our efforts to train Afghans to sustain their own security and to reconcile former adversaries. That's why we are increasing our support for the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, so that we stand on the side not only of security, but also of opportunity and the promise of a better life.

Remarks in a Discussion With Students in Istanbul, Turkey
April 7, 2009
So, yes, I think that it is just and right for the United States and NATO allies and other allies from around the world to do what we can to eliminate the threat of Al Qaida. Now, I think it's important that we don't just do that militarily. I think it's important that we provide educational opportunities for young people in Pakistan and Afghanistan so that they see a different path. And so my policies will be somewhat different, but I don't make any apologies for continuing the effort to prevent bombs going off or planes going into buildings that would kill innocents. I don't think any society can justify that.

The President's Weekly Address
April 11, 2009
It is only by working together that we will finally defeat 21st-century security threats like Al Qaida. So it was heartening that our NATO allies united in Strasbourg behind our strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan and contributed important resources to support our efforts there.

Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and a Question-and-Answer Session in Arnold, Missouri
April 29, 2009
And finally, we can't rest until America is secure and our leadership is restored. And that's why I've begun to end the war in Iraq through a responsible transition to Iraqi control. It is their country, they need to take control. That's why we have a new strategy to disrupt and dismantle and defeat Al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan. That's why we've renewed our diplomacy to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons, to speak directly to our adversaries, and strengthen relations in the hemisphere.
In Afghanistan and neighboring Pakistan, we do have real problems with the Taliban and Al Qaida. They are the single most direct threat to our national security interests. And I had some grumblings and complaints from certain factions in the Democratic Party when I made a decision to send 17,000 additional troops there. I understand people's concerns. But as Commander in Chief, it is my responsibility to make sure that bin Laden and his cronies are not able to create a safe heaven--haven within which they can kill another 3,000 Americans or more. That's an obligation that I have.

The President's News Conference
April 29, 2009
I also campaigned on the promise that I would change the direction of our Nation's foreign policy, and we've begun to do that as well. We've begun to end the war in Iraq, and we forged with our NATO allies a new strategy to target Al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We have rejected the false choice between our security and our ideals by closing the detention center at Guantanamo Bay and banning torture without exception. And we've renewed our diplomatic efforts to deal with challenges ranging from the global economic crisis to the spread of nuclear weapons.
The President. I'm confident that we can make sure that Pakistan's nuclear arsenal is secure, primarily, initially, because the Pakistani army, I think, recognizes the hazards of those weapons falling into the wrong hands. We've got strong military-to-military consultation and cooperation. I am gravely concerned about the situation in Pakistan not because I think that they're immediately going to be overrun and the Taliban would take over in Pakistan; more concerned that the civilian Government there right now is very fragile and don't seem to have the capacity to deliver basic services: schools, health care, rule of law, a judicial system that works for the majority of people. And so as a consequence, it is very difficult for them to gain the support and the loyalty of their people. 
So we need to help Pakistan help Pakistanis. And I think that there's a recognition increasingly on the part of both the civilian Government there and the army that that is their biggest weakness. 
On the military side, you're starting to see some recognition just in the last few days that the obsession with India as the mortal threat to Pakistan has been misguided, and that their biggest threat right now comes internally. And you're starting to see the Pakistan military take much more seriously the armed threat from militant extremists. 
We want to continue to encourage Pakistan to move in that direction, and we will provide them all the cooperation that we can. We want to respect their sovereignty, but we also recognize that we have huge strategic interests, huge national security interests in making sure that Pakistan is stable, and that you don't end up having a nuclear armed militant state. 
The President. I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals of that sort. I feel confident that that nuclear arsenal will remain out of militant hands. Okay?

Remarks Following a Meeting With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and President Asif Ali Zardari of Pakistan
May 6, 2009
Well, thank you, everybody. We're going to be making formal remarks over there, but we just wanted to say that we've had an extraordinarily productive day. And what is represented around the table is not just three Presidents but rather it's ministers, agency heads at every level, and that reflects the kind of concrete cooperation and detail that is going to, ultimately, make a difference in improving opportunity and democracy and stability in Pakistan and in Afghanistan. So we'll see you guys over there

Remarks Following a Meeting With Minister of Foreign Affairs Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia
May 7, 2009
As I've said before, I think we have an excellent opportunity to reset the relationship between the United States and Russia on a whole host of issues, from nuclear weapons and nuclear proliferation, the situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan, how we approach Iran, how we approach the Middle East, commercial ties between the two countries, and how we address the financial crisis that has put such a strain on the economies of all countries around the world.

Remarks Announcing the Nomination of Governor Jon M. Huntsman, Jr., To Be Ambassador to China
May 16, 2009
And that's why we're working with the Government of China to stem the financial crisis that's devastated economies around the world and help lay a foundation for sustainable growth and lasting prosperity on both sides of the Pacific. That's why I've spoken with Chinese President Hu Jintao about a number of regional threats, including the situations in North Korea and Pakistan. And that's why we will continue working together with China on a whole host of global challenges, ranging from energy and climate change to public health, from nuclear nonproliferation to terrorism and violent extremism.

Remarks Following a Meeting on the United States Nonproliferation Policy
May 19, 2009
This is particularly true at a time when countries like North Korea and Iran are in the process of developing nuclear weapons capacity, at a time when we see a country like Pakistan with a large nuclear arsenal on the other side of a long-running conflict in the subcontinent with India, at a time when terrorist organizations like Al Qaida are trying to seek fissile material. It is absolutely imperative that America takes leadership, working with not just our Russian counterparts, but countries all around the world, to reduce and ultimately eliminate the dangers that are posed by nuclear weapons.

Remarks at the National Archives and Records Administration
May 21, 2009
Already, we've taken several steps to achieve that goal. For the first time since 2002, we're providing the necessary resources and strategic direction to take the fight to the extremists who attacked us on 9/11, in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We're investing in the 21st century military and intelligence capabilities that will allow us to stay one step ahead of a nimble enemy. We have reenergized a global nonproliferation regime to deny the world's most dangerous people access to the world's deadliest weapons. And we've launched an effort to secure all loose nuclear materials within 4 years. We're better protecting our border and increasing our preparedness for any future attack or natural disaster. We're building new partnerships around the world to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its affiliates. And we have renewed American diplomacy so that we once again have the strength and standing to truly lead the world.

Commencement Address at the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland
May 22, 2009
And today, this is the promise I make to you. It's a promise that as long as I am your Commander in Chief, I will only send you into harm's way when it is absolutely necessary, and with the strategy and the well-defined goals, the equipment and the support that you need to get the job done. This includes the job of bringing the Iraq war to a responsible end and pursuing a new comprehensive strategy to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its allies in Afghanistan and Pakistan.

Interview With Justin Webb of BBC World News
June 1, 2009
And the last point I made, because I should actually correct myself, when I said "both sides," there are actually many sides to this, because one of the misapprehensions about--misperceptions about the Muslim community is that it's somehow monolithic. And, you know, setting aside differences between Shi'a and Sunni, the Muslim country that I lived in when I was a child, Indonesia, obviously, is very different from Pakistan, is very different from Saudi Arabia. And so we have to also recognize that there are going to be differences based on national identity and not just faith.

Interview With Michele Norris and Steve Inskeep of National Public Radio
June 1, 2009
But I am somebody who is very anxious to have the Afghan Government and the Pakistani Government have the capacity to ensure that those safe havens don't exist. And so it's--I think will be an important reminder that we have no territorial ambitions in Afghanistan. We don't have an interest in exploiting the resources of Afghanistan. What we want is simply that people aren't hanging out in Afghanistan who are plotting to bomb the United States. And I think that's a fairly modest goal that other Muslim countries should be able to understand.

Remarks in Cairo
June 4, 2009
Make no mistake, we do not want to keep our troops in Afghanistan. We see no--we seek no military bases there. It is agonizing for America to lose our young men and women. It is costly and politically difficult to continue this conflict. We would gladly bring every single one of our troops home, if we could be confident that there were not violent extremists in Afghanistan and now Pakistan determined to kill as many Americans as they possibly can. But that is not yet the case. 
Now, we also know that military power alone is not going to solve the problems in Afghanistan and Pakistan. That's why we plan to invest $1.5 billion each year over the next 5 years to partner with Pakistanis to build schools and hospitals, roads and businesses, and hundreds of millions to help those who've been displaced. That's why we are providing more than $2.8 billion to help Afghans develop their economy and deliver services that people depend on. 
Now, let me be clear: Issues of women's equality are by no means simply an issue for Islam. In Turkey, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia, we've seen Muslim-majority countries elect a woman to lead. Meanwhile, the struggle for women's equality continues in many aspects of American life and in countries around the world.

Interview With Foreign Journalists in Cairo
June 4, 2009
And so if we are talking about Iraq, for example, I think normalizing relations and exchanging ambassadors between Saudi Arabia and Iraq will be helpful to Iraq and its stabilization. With respect to Pakistan and the situation in Afghanistan/Pakistan, we're seeing a lot of displaced people. Making sure that there are resources that are put in place so that those displaced persons don't experience enormous suffering, but also so that you don't have further radicalization of an entire population that has been uprooted because of conflict, Saudi Arabia is going to be critical.

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany in Dresden, Germany
June 5, 2009
Chancellor Merkel and I discussed a range of security challenges. Germany has been a very strong NATO partner. As all of you know, we have great challenges in Afghanistan and, increasingly, in Pakistan, but our collective commitment to making sure that we are not seeing the kinds of terrorist bases that could pose harm to all of our people, that we maintain that commitment.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi of Italy and an Exchange With Reporters
June 15, 2009
We discussed Afghanistan and Pakistan, where Italy has been a critical part of the coalition that is trying to assist Afghanistan in stabilizing itself and ensuring that it's not a safe haven for terrorism. We had an extensive discussion about my interest in pursuing nonproliferation as an important agenda for all people. And given that I'll be visiting Russia before I visit Italy for the G-8, Prime Minister Berlusconi, who has strong relationships with the Russians, was able to offer some insight in terms of how to approach reductions in nuclear arsenals. And that, hopefully, is going to be a topic at the G-8 summit as well.
When it comes to Afghanistan and Pakistan, we are part of the same coalition that wants to make sure that the Afghan Government is able and strong to sustain development for the Afghan people, but also to make sure that they're not serving as a safe haven for extremists. When it comes to the world economy, I think all of us have an interest in improving the kinds of financial regulations that will prevent the kinds of crises that we saw happening most recently.

The President's News Conference With Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany
June 26, 2009
We agreed that confronting violent extremism and preventing terrorist attacks demands our continued commitment and a comprehensive strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan. This includes dismantling and disrupting, defeating Al Qaida and its allies. Germany has been a strong partner in the NATO mission in Afghanistan, and we honor those who serve there, including American and German soldiers who gave their lives there this week.

Interview with Novaya Gazeta
July 6, 2009
Of course not. I seek to reset relations with Russia because I believe that Americans and Russians have many common interests, interests that our governments recently have not pursued as actively as we could have. For instance, I believe that Americans and Russians both would benefit from fewer nuclear weapons in the world, greater control over nuclear materials around the world, a defeat of extremist elements in Afghanistan and Pakistan, an Iran that produces nuclear energy but not nuclear weapons, and a North Korea that refrains from launching missiles and exploding nuclear weapons and instead returns to the negotiating table. I also believe that Americans and Russians have a common interest in the development of rule of rule, the strengthening of democracy, and the protection of human rights. As I said in my inaugural address: "To those who cling to power through corruption and deceit and the silencing of dissent, know that you are on the wrong side of history, but that we will extend a hand if you are willing to unclench your fist." I then emphasized in my Cairo speech that "I do have an unyielding belief that all people yearn for certain things: the ability to speak your mind and have a say in how you are governed; confidence in the rule of law and the equal administration of justice; government that is transparent and doesn't steal from the people; the freedom to live as you choose. These are not just American ideas; they are human rights." These are ideas embraced by your president and your people. I agree with President Medvedev when he said that "Freedom is better than the absence of freedom." So, I see no reason why we cannot aspire together to strengthen democracy, human rights, and the rule of law as part of our "reset."

The President's News Conference With President Dmitry A. Medvedev of Russia in Moscow
July 6, 2009
And President Medvedev is right that this is important for Afghanistan, but it's also important with respect to Pakistan. And we're going to have to think regionally in terms of how we approach these problems. Obviously, there are countries along the border of Afghanistan and Central Asia that are of deep strategic importance, and it's very important that we also include them in these conversations about how we can move forward

Remarks at a Graduation Ceremony at the New Economic School in Moscow, Russia
July 7, 2009
This is the core of the nuclear challenge in the 21st century, the notion that prestige comes from holding these weapons, or that we can protect ourselves by picking and choosing which nation can have these weapons, is an illusion. In the short period since the end of the cold war, we've already seen India, Pakistan, and North Korea conduct nuclear tests. Without a fundamental change, do any of us truly believe that the next two decades will not bring about the further spread of these nuclear weapons?
Now, in addition to securing the world's most dangerous weapons, a second area where America has a critical national interest is in isolating and defeating violent extremists. For years, Al Qaida and its affiliates have defiled a great religion of peace and justice and ruthlessly murdered men, women, and children of all nationalities and faiths. Indeed, above all, they have murdered Muslims. And these extremists have killed in Amman and Bali, Islamabad and Kabul, and they have the blood of Americans and Russians on their hands. They're plotting to kill more of our people, and they benefit from safe havens that allow them to train and operate, particularly along the border of Pakistan and Afghanistan.
And that's why America has a clear goal: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its allies in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We seek no bases, nor do we want to control these nations. Instead, we want to work with international partners, including Russia, to help Afghans and Pakistanis advance their own security and prosperity. And that's why I'm pleased that Russia has agreed to allow the United States to supply our coalition forces through your territory. Neither America nor Russia has an interest in an Afghanistan or Pakistan governed by the Taliban. itistime to work together on behalf of a different future, a future in which we leave behind the great game of the past and the conflict of the present, a future in which all of us contribute to the security of Central Asia.

Remarks at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Convention in Phoenix, Arizona
August 17, 2009
By moving forward in Iraq, we're able to refocus on the war against Al Qaida and its extremist allies in Afghanistan and Pakistan. That's why I announced a new, comprehensive strategy in March, a strategy that recognizes that Al Qaida and its allies had moved their base from the remote, tribal areas—to the remote, tribal areas of Pakistan. This strategy acknowledges that military power alone will not win this war, that we also need diplomacy and development and good governance. And our new strategy has a clear mission and defined goals: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its extremist allies.
And going forward, we will constantly adapt to new tactics to stay ahead of the enemy and give our troops the tools and equipment they need to succeed. And at every step of the way, we will assess our efforts to defeat Al Qaida and its extremist allies and to help the Afghan and Pakistani people build the future that they seek.

Interview With Michael A. Smerconish of the "Michael Smerconish Morning Show"
August 20, 2009
On the other hand, you've got the Pakistani Army for the first time actually fighting in a very aggressive way, and that's how we took out Baitullah Mehsud——
The President. ——the top Taliban leader in Pakistan, who was also one of bin Laden's key allies. So the goal here is essentially to have a pincer, where we are squeezing them on both sides. We're eliminating their allies. It's making it more difficult for them to communicate, making it more difficult for them to operate safe havens, and over time, what we hope to do is to flush them out. We are going to keep on putting pressure on them, and I know that it's at great cost. I mean, I have to sign letters to family members who have fallen, and a lot more are falling in Afghanistan than in Iraq. And as a consequence, we've got to make sure that we are really focused on finishing the job in Afghanistan, but it's going to take some time.

Videotaped Remarks on the Observance of Ramadan
August 21, 2009
Beyond America's borders, we're also committed to keeping our responsibility to build a world that is more peaceful and secure. That's why we're responsibly ending the war in Iraq. That's why we are isolating violent extremists while empowering the people in places like Afghanistan and Pakistan. And that is why we strongly and actively support a two-state solution that recognizes the rights of Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace and security. That's also why America will always stand for the universal rights of all people to speak their mind, practice their religion, contribute fully to their society, and have confidence in the rule of law.

Remarks on Presenting Posthumously the Congressional Medal of Honor to Sergeant First Class Jared C. Monti
September 17, 2009
It was June 21, 2006, in the remotest northeast of Afghanistan, near the border with Pakistan. Sergeant Monti was a team leader on a 16-man patrol. They'd been on the move for 3 days, down dirt roads, sloshing through rivers, hiking up steep mountain trails, their heavy gear on their backs, moving at night and in the early morning to avoid the scorching 100-degree heat. Their mission: to keep watch on the valley down below in advance of an operation to clear the area of militants.

Interview with David Gregory on NBC News' "Meet the Press"
September 20, 2009
PRESIDENT OBAMA: I don't have a deadline for withdrawal, but I'm certainly not somebody who believes in indefinite occupations of other countries. Keep in mind what happened when I came in. We had been adrift, I think, when it came to our Afghanistan strategy. And what I said was that we are going to do a top to bottom review of what's taking place there. Not just a one-time review, but we're going to do a review before the election in Afghanistan and then we're going to do another review after the election. And we are going to see how this is fitting what I think is our core goal, which is to go after the folks who killed 3,000 Americans during 9/11 and who are still plotting to kill us: al-Qaeda. How do we dismantle them, disrupt them, destroy them? Now, getting our strategy right in Afghanistan and in Pakistan are both important elements of that. But that's our goal, and I want to stay focused on that. And, and so right now what's happened is, is that we've had an election in Afghanistan. It did not go as smoothly as I think we would have hoped, and that there are some serious issues in terms of how that--how the election was conducted in some parts of the country. But we've had that election. We now finally have the 21,000 troops in place that I had already ordered to go.

Interview with John King on CNN's "State of the Union"
September 20, 2009
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, no, no, no. Keep in mind that we have a -- we put a strategy in place, clarified our goals, but what the election has shown, as well as changing circumstances in Pakistan, is that, you know, this is going to be a very difficult operation, and we've got to make sure that we're constantly refining it to keep our focus on what our primary goals are.

Interview with Bob Schieffer on CBS News' "Face the Nation"
September 20, 2009
PRESIDENT OBAMA: Well, no, let's be clear. My central focus is: What we doing to protect the American people and the American homeland? Afghanistan and Pakistan are critical elements in that process. But the only reason I send a -- single -- young man or woman in uniform anywhere in the world is because I think it's necessary to keep us safe.

Remarks at the Fifth Annual Meeting of the Clinton Global Initiative in New York City
September 22, 2009
I first saw it in my mother; she was an anthropologist who dedicated her life to understanding and improving the lives of the rural poor, from Indonesia to Pakistan. Whether working with USAID or the Asian Development Bank, the Ford Foundation, Bank Rakyat in Jakarta, or Women's World Banking here in New York, she championed the cause of women's welfare and helped pioneer the microloans that have helped lift millions from poverty.
Your ability to serve people in the disconnected corners of the world reminds us of another truth: We stand at a transformational moment in world history, when our interconnected world presents us at once with great promise, but also with great peril. The very technologies that empower us to create and build also empower those who would destroy and disrupt, the extremists in the mountains of Afghanistan and Pakistan who fuel attacks from New York to London to Bali, from Mombasa to Madrid to Mumbai.
In fact, this spirit of partnership is a defining feature of our foreign policy. Because Government and the military can work to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat terrorist networks, but while the violent extremists only destroy, we have to make it clear the kind of future that we want to build. That's why we're investing in people's education and health and welfare, as we are doing in Afghanistan and Pakistan. And we need to build new partnerships across regions and religions. And that requires religious leaders and NGOs and citizens to help build the good governance and the transparent institutions and basic services upon which true security depends.

Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 2009
We have set a clear and focused goal: to work with all members of this body to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its extremist allies, a network that has killed thousands of people of many faiths and nations, and that plotted to blow up this very building. In Afghanistan and Pakistan, we and many nations here are helping these Governments develop the capacity to take the lead in this effort, while working to advance opportunity and security for their people.
That effort must begin with an unshakeable determination that the murder of innocent men, women, and children will never be tolerated. On this, no one can be—there can be no dispute. The violent extremists who promote conflict by distorting faith have discredited and isolated themselves. They offer nothing but hatred and destruction. In confronting them, America will forge lasting partnerships to target terrorists, share intelligence, and coordinate law enforcement and protect our people. We will permit no safe haven for Al Qaida to launch attacks from Afghanistan or any other nation. We will stand by our friends on the frontlines, as we and many nations will do in pledging support for the Pakistani people tomorrow. And we will pursue positive engagement that builds bridges among faiths and new partnerships for opportunity.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama of Japan in New York City
September 23, 2009
And we pledged that we wanted to strengthen and deepen that relationship. As the world's two largest economies, we recognize the importance of coordinating closely to continue to move beyond the current economic crisis and to focus our attention on how our economies are actually providing opportunity for ordinary citizens. And we also pledged to coordinate very closely together on a range of international threats: everything from nuclear proliferation, the situation in North Korea, how we can help to stabilize Afghanistan and Pakistan, and how we address transnational issues like climate change.

The President's News Conference in Pittsburgh
September 25, 2009
Stability in Afghanistan and in Pakistan are critical to that mission. And after several years of drift in Afghanistan, we now find ourselves in a situation in which you have strong commitments from the ISAF coalition, our NATO allies. All of them arecommitted to making this work. But I think there's also a recognition that after that many years of drift, it's important that we examine our strategies to make sure that they actually can deliver on preventing Al Qaida from establishing safe havens.

Remarks at the National Counterterrorism Center in McLean, Virginia
October 6, 2009
We know that Al Qaida and its extremist allies threaten us from different corners of the globe, from Pakistan, but also from East Africa and Southeast Asia, from Europe and the Gulf. And that's why we're applying focused and relentless pressure on Al Qaida by sharing more intelligence, strengthening the capacity of our partners, disrupting terrorist financing, cutting off supply chains, and inflicting major losses on Al Qaida's leadership.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero of Spain and an Exchange With Reporters
October 13, 2009
And I won't provide you a preview of what I've been seeing or hearing. I will tell you that our principal goal remains to root out Al Qaida and its extremist allies that can launch attacks against the United States or its allies. That's our principal mission. We are also, obviously, interested in stability in the region, and that includes not only Afghanistan but also Pakistan.

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Reception in San Francisco
October 15, 2009
That's what we did here at home. Abroad, we began a new era of engagement. Working with partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and seek the long-term goal of a safer, more secure world free of nuclear weapons; working in concert with other nations on just about every continent to stem the global economic downturn and to confront climate change. We banned torture. We're closing Guantanamo. We're rebuilding our military. We're reaffirming our alliances. We are drawing down responsibly and ending the war in Iraq. We made good progress in taking the fight to Al Qaida, from Pakistan to Somalia to Indonesia. I went to Cairo on behalf of America to start a new dialogue with the Muslim world.

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraiser in New York City
October 20, 2009
We banned torture. We committed to closing Guantanamo. We're rebuilding our military. We're reaffirming our alliances. We're getting out of Iraq. We've made progress in fighting Al Qaida in Pakistan and Somalia and Indonesia.

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Dinner in New York City
October 20, 2009
Now, that's what we've been able to do at home. I've got a few things going on abroad. [Laughter] We've begun a new era of engagement. We're working with our partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, to seek the long-term goal of a safer, more secure world that is free of nuclear weapons. We are—we're working in concert with nations on just about every continent to stem our global economic downturn and to confront climate change. We banned torture. We're rebuilding our military. We're reaffirming our alliances. We've begun to leave Iraq to its own people. We've made progress in taking the fight to Al Qaida, from Pakistan to Somalia to Indonesia. And we're making progress there too.

Remarks at a Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Reception in Miami, Florida
October 26, 2009
Internationally, we've begun a new era of engagement. We're working with our partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons. We're seeking a safer, more secure world free of nuclear weapons. We're working in concert with nations on every continent to stem the economic downturn, to deal with climate change. We banned torture. We're rebuilding our military. We're reaffirming our alliances. We are going to close Guantanamo. We are serious about this. We've made good progress taking the fight to Al Qaida, from Pakistan to Somalia——

Remarks Following a Meeting With European Union Leaders
November 3, 2009
Our discussions today built upon my April meeting with all 27 EU leaders in Prague. We discussed our shared commitment to success in Afghanistan and Pakistan, where EU civilian assistance has played an absolutely critical role. We discussed climate change extensively, and all of us agreed that it was imperative for us to redouble our efforts in the weeks between now and the Copenhagen meeting to assure that we create a framework for progress in dealing with what is a potential ecologic disaster. We discussed the situation in Iran and emphasized how important it is for the United States and the European Union to coordinate carefully and closely in sending a clear message to Tehran that we want them to be a full member of the community of nations, but that they have to act consistent with international rules and responsibilities with respect to their nuclear program.

Remarks at a Memorial Service at Fort Hood, Texas
November 10, 2009
These are trying times for our country. In Afghanistan and Pakistan, the same extremists who killed nearly 3,000 Americans continue to endanger America, our allies, and innocent Afghans and Pakistanis. In Iraq, we're working to bring a war to a successful end, as there are still those who would deny the Iraqi people the future that Americans and Iraqis have sacrificed so much for.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama of Japan in Tokyo, Japan
November 13, 2009
The Prime Minister and I discussed our cooperation on Afghanistan and Pakistan. And I did thank the people of Japan and the Prime Ministers for the powerful commitment of a—$5 billion over the next 5 years to support our shared civilian efforts in Afghanistan, as well as the commitment of a billion dollars to Pakistan.
This underscores Japan's prominent role within a broad international coalition that is advancing the cause of stability and opportunity in Afghanistan and Pakistan. And I shared with the Prime Minister our efforts in refining our approach to make it more successful in the coming year.

Remarks in Tokyo
November 14, 2009
In the half-century since, that alliance has endured as a foundation for our security and prosperity. It has helped us become the world's two largest economies, with Japan emerging as America's second largest trading partner outside of North America. It has evolved as Japan has played a larger role on the world stage and made important contributions to stability around the world, from reconstruction in Iraq to combating piracy off the Horn of Africa to assistance for the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, most recently through its remarkable leadership in providing additional commitments to international development efforts there.
Now, as with any nation, America will approach China with a focus on our interests. But it's precisely for this reason that it is important to pursue pragmatic cooperation with China on issues of mutual concern, because no one nation can meet the challenges of the 21st century alone, and the United States and China will both be better off when we are able to meet them together. That's why we welcome China's effort to play a greater role on the world stage, a role in which their growing economy is joined by growing responsibility. China's partnership has proved critical in our effort to jump-start economic recovery. China has promoted security and stability in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and it is now committed to the global nonproliferation regime and supporting the pursuit of denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and a Question-and-Answer Session in Shanghai
November 16, 2009
Now, the reason we originally went into Afghanistan was because Al Qaida was in Afghanistan, being hosted by the Taliban. They have now moved over the border of Afghanistan, and they are in Pakistan now, but they continue to have networks with other extremist organizations in that region. And I do believe that it is important for us to stabilize Afghanistan so that the people of Afghanistan can protect themselves, but they can also be a partner in reducing the power of these extremist networks.
But it's a difficult task. It's not easy. And ultimately, I think, in trying to defeat these terrorist extremists, it's important to understand it's not just a military exercise. We also have to think about what motivates young people to become terrorists, why would they become suicide bombers. And although there are, obviously, a lot of different reasons, including, I think, the perversion of religion, in thinking that somehow these kinds of violent acts are appropriate, part of what's happened in places like Pakistan and Afghanistan is these young people have no education, they have no opportunities, and so they see no way for them to move forward in life, and that leads them into thinking that this is their only option.

Remarks Following a Meeting With President Hu Jintao of China in Beijing
November 17, 2009
President Hu and I also discussed our mutual interest in security and stability of Afghanistan and Pakistan. And neither country can or should be used as a base for terrorism, and we agreed to cooperate more on meeting this goal, including bringing about more stable, peaceful relations in all of South Asia.

Interview with Chip Reid on CBS' "Early Show"
November 18, 2009
PRESIDENT OBAMA:  Afghans are responsible for their own security. We've got to get Pakistan involved in a more effective way.  So there are a range of things that we know we have to do.  And at this point, it's a matter of fine-tuning a strategy that we can be confident will be successful and also won't be open-ended.  And I think that General McChrystal shares the same goal that I do and the same goal that the American people do, which is for us to be able to protect our homeland, protect our allies, protect U.S. interests around the world.

The President's News Conference With President Lee Myung-bak of South Korea in South Korea
November 19, 2009
We also discussed the importance of promoting security and stability in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and I welcomed President Lee's decision to establish a Provincial Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan. This important contribution will help support the strengthening of Afghan capacity, which is essential to achieving our goals in Afghanistan.

The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India
November 24, 2009
Obviously, there are historic conflicts between India and Pakistan. It is not the place of the United States to try to, from the outside, resolve all those conflicts. On the other hand, we want to be encouraging of ways in which both India and Pakistan can feel secure and focus on the development of their own countries and their people.
With respect to the relationship between the United States and Pakistan's military, I think that there have probably been times in the past in which we were so single-mindedly focused just on military assistance in Pakistan that we didn't think more broadly about how to encourage and develop the kinds of civil society in Pakistan that would make a difference in the lives of people day to day.
And Secretary Clinton, I think, has done an excellent job in trying to move forward. Where is she? I thought she was around here somewhere. But anyway, she's done an excellent job, I think, in helping our State Department to refocus our energies on that front as well.
And obviously, Pakistan has an enormously important role in the security of the region by making sure that the extremist organizations that often operate out of its territories are dealt with effectively. And we've seen some progress. The work that the Pakistan military is doing in the Swat Valley in west—in South Waziristan all indicates the degree to which they are beginning to recognize that extremism, even if initially directed to the outside, can ultimately also have an adverse impact on their security internally.
So my hope is, is that over time what we're going to see is further clarity and further cooperation between all the parties and all peoples of good will in the region to eradiate terrorist activity, to eradicate the kind of violent extremism that we've seen. I think that will benefit the peoples of Pakistan and India and the world community as well.

Remarks at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York
December 1, 2009
But while we've achieved hard-earned milestones in Iraq, the situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated. After escaping across the border into Pakistan in 2001 and 2002, Al Qaida's leadership established a safe haven there. Although a legitimate Government was elected by the Afghan people, it's been hampered by corruption, the drug trade, an underdeveloped economy, and insufficient security forces. 
Over the last several years, the Taliban has maintained common cause with Al Qaida, as they both seek an overthrow of the Afghan Government. Gradually, the Taliban has begun to control additional swaths of territory in Afghanistan, while engaging in increasingly brazen and devastating attacks of terrorism against the Pakistani people. 
Now, throughout this period, our troop levels in Afghanistan remained a fraction of what they were in Iraq. When I took office, we had just over 32,000 Americans serving in Afghanistan, compared to 160,000 in Iraq at the peak of the war. Commanders in Afghanistan repeatedly asked for support to deal with the reemergence of the Taliban, but these reinforcements did not arrive. And that's why, shortly after taking office, I approved a longstanding request for more troops. After consultations with our allies, I then announced a strategy recognizing the fundamental connection between our war effort in Afghanistan and the extremist safe havens in Pakistan. I set a goal that was narrowly defined as disrupting, dismantling, and defeating Al Qaida and its extremist allies, and pledged to better coordinate our military and civilian efforts. 
Since then, we've made progress on some important objectives. High-ranking Al Qaida and Taliban leaders have been killed, and we've stepped up the pressure on Al Qaida worldwide. In Pakistan, that nation's army has gone on its largest offensive in years. In Afghanistan, we and our allies prevented the Taliban from stopping a Presidential election, and although it was marred by fraud, that election produced a Government that is consistent with Afghanistan's laws and Constitution. 
So no, I do not make this decision lightly. I make this decision because I am convinced that our security is at stake in Afghanistan and Pakistan. This is the epicenter of violent extremism practiced by Al Qaida. It is from here that we were attacked on 9/11, and it is from here that new attacks are being plotted as I speak. This is no idle danger, no hypothetical threat. In the last few months alone, we have apprehended extremists within our borders who were sent here from the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan to commit new acts of terror. And this danger will only grow if the region slides backwards and Al Qaida can operate with impunity. We must keep the pressure on Al Qaida, and to do that, we must increase the stability and capacity of our partners in the region. 
Of course, this burden is not ours alone to bear. This is not just America's war. Since 9/11, Al Qaida's safe havens have been the source of attacks against London and Amman and Bali. The people and Governments of both Afghanistan and Pakistan are endangered. And the stakes are even higher within a nuclear-armed Pakistan, because we know that Al Qaida and other extremists seek nuclear weapons, and we have every reason to believe that they would use them. 
These facts compel us to act, along with our friends and allies. Our overarching goal remains the same: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan and to prevent its capacity to threaten America and our allies in the future. 
Third, we will act with the full recognition that our success in Afghanistan is inextricably linked to our partnership with Pakistan. We're in Afghanistan to prevent a cancer from once again spreading through that country. But this same cancer has also taken root in the border region of Pakistan. And that's why we need a strategy that works on both sides of the border. 
In the past, there have been those in Pakistan who've argued that the struggle against extremism is not their fight and that Pakistan is better off doing little or seeking accommodation with those who use violence. But in recent years, as innocents have been killed from Karachi to Islamabad, it has become clear that it is the Pakistani people who are the most endangered by extremism. Public opinion has turned. The Pakistani Army has waged an offensive in Swat and South Waziristan. And there is no doubt that the United States and Pakistan share a common enemy. 
In the past, we too often defined our relationship with Pakistan narrowly, and those days are over. Moving forward, we arecommitted to a partnership with Pakistan that is built on a foundation of mutual interest, mutual respect, and mutual trust. We will strengthen Pakistan's capacity to target those groups that threaten our countries and have made it clear that we cannot tolerate a safe haven for terrorists whose location is known and whose intentions are clear. America is also providing substantial resources to support Pakistan's democracy and development. We are the largest international supporter for those Pakistanis displaced by the fighting. And going forward, the Pakistan people must know America will remain a strong supporter of Pakistan's security and prosperity long after the guns have fallen silent so that the great potential of its people can be unleashed. 
These are the three core elements of our strategy: a military effort to create the conditions for a transition, a civilian surge that reinforces positive action, and an effective partnership with Pakistan. 
Now, let me be clear: None of this will be easy. The struggle against violent extremism will not be finished quickly, and it extends well beyond Afghanistan and Pakistan. It will be an enduring test of our free society and our leadership in the world. And unlike the great power conflicts and clear lines of division that defined the 20th century, our effort will involve disorderly regions, failed states, diffuse enemies.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg of Norway and an Exchange With Reporters in Oslo
December 10, 2009
President Obama. First of all, with respect to the five young men who were arrested in Pakistan, I think the details are still forthcoming. There will undoubtedly be a series of investigations surrounding these events, so I'd prefer not to comment on them at this point.
And as I indicated to the Prime Minister, I think it's very important to understand that we're not going to see some sharp cliff, some precipitous drawdown. Our whole concept here is to train and partner with Afghan forces and to transfer to them even as our troops are fighting alongside each other. It's also important to understand that several years after U.S. combat troops have been drastically reduced in the region, and ISAF troops have been reduced in the region, the Afghan Government is still going to need support for those security forces. We are still going to have an interest in partnering with Afghans and Pakistanis and others in dealing with the remnants of terrorist activity there

Interview With Steve Kroft on CBS' "60 Minutes"
December 13, 2009
The President: What you have here between the borders of Afghanistan and Pakistan is the epicenter of violent extremism directed against the West and directed against the United States. This is the heart of it. This is where bin Laden is. This is where its allies are. It's from here that you see attacks launched, not just against the United States, but against London, against Bali, against a whole host of countries. 
The President: Half of this territory is in Afghanistan, half of it is in Pakistan. Ultimately, in order for us to eradicate the problem, to really go after al Qaeda in an effective way, we are going to need more cooperation from Pakistan. There is no doubt about that. 

Remarks in Kaneohe, Hawaii
December 28, 2009
Third, I've directed my national security team to keep up the pressure on those who would attack our country. We do not yet have all the answers about this latest attempt, but those who would slaughter innocent men, women, and children must know that the United States will more—do more than simply strengthen our defenses; we will continue to use every element of our national power to disrupt, to dismantle, and defeat the violent extremists who threaten us, whether they are from Afghanistan or Pakistan, Yemen or Somalia, or anywhere where they are plotting attacks against the U.S. homeland.

The President's Weekly Address
January 2, 2010
Make no mistake, that's exactly what we've been doing. It's why I refocused the fight, bringing to a responsible end the war in Iraq, which had nothing to do with the 9/11 attacks, and dramatically increasing our resources in the region where Al Qaida is actually based, in Afghanistan and Pakistan. That's why I've set a clear and achievable mission to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its extremist allies and prevent their return to either country. And it's why we've forged new partnerships, as in Yemen, and put unrelenting pressure on these extremists wherever they plot and train, from East Africa to Southeast Asia, from Europe to the Persian Gulf.

Remarks Following a Meeting on Improving Homeland Security
January 5, 2010
Indeed, over the past year, we've taken the fight to Al Qaida and its allies wherever they plot and train, be it in Afghanistan and Pakistan, in Yemen and Somalia, or in other countries around the world.

Question-and-Answer Session With YouTube Participants
February 1, 2010
And we have to fight them on all fronts. We have to fight them in very concrete ways in Afghanistan and along the border regions of Pakistan, where they are still holed up. They have spread to places like Yemen and Somalia, and we are working internationally with partners to try to limit their scope of operations and dismantle them in those regions.
We have to project economically, working in countries like a Yemen--that is extraordinarily poor--to make sure that young people there have opportunity. The same is true in a place like Pakistan.

Interview With Steve Grove on "YouTube"
February 1, 2010
Now, they employ terrorist tactics. But we need to be clear about who our -- who our target is. And we have to fight them on all fronts. We have to fight them in very concrete ways in Afghanistan and along the border regions of Pakistan, where they are still holed up. 
The same is true in a place like Pakistan. So we want to use all of our national power to deal with the problem of these extremist organizations. But part of that does involve applications of military power. 

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraiser and a Question-and-Answer Session
February 4, 2010
That's what your support has helped us do here at home. Abroad, we've begun a new era of engagement. We're working with our partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and seek a world free of them. We're working with other nations to confront climate change. We banned torture. We're rebuilding our military and reaffirming our alliances. We've begun to leave Iraq to its own people. We've charted a new way forward in Afghanistan and Pakistan. And we've made progress in taking the fight to Al Qaida across the globe. I went to Cairo on behalf of America to begin a new dialogue with the Muslim world. And we are living up to a moment that demands American leadership by standing tall alongside the people of Haiti

Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fundraiser
February 4, 2010
That's what your support has helped us do at home. Abroad, we've begun a new era of engagement. We're working with our partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, seeking a world free of them. We're working with other nations to confront climate change. We are now a leader and not a follower in that critical mission. We banned torture. We're rebuilding our military. We're reaffirming our alliances. We've begun to leave Iraq to its own people, as I committed to doing in the campaign. And we've charted a new way forward in Afghanistan and Pakistan. We're making progress every single day in taking the fight to Al Qaida and across the globe. And I went to Cairo on behalf of the American people to begin a new dialogue with the Muslim world.

Remarks During a Meeting With the Democratic National Committee
February 6, 2010
Overseas, we've begun a new era of engagement. We're working with our partners to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, and to seek a world free of nuclear weapons. We banned torture. We have begun to leave Iraq to its own people. We've charted a new way forward in Afghanistan and Pakistan and made good progress in taking the fight to Al Qaida across the globe. I went to Cairo on behalf of America to begin a new dialogue with the Muslim world. And we are living up to a moment that demands American leadership by standing side by side with the people of Haiti.

Remarks to United States and Coalition Troops at Bagram Air Base, Afghanistan
March 28, 2010
We can't forget why we're here. We did not choose this war. This was not an act of America wanting to expand its influence, of us wanting to meddle in somebody else's business. We were attacked viciously on 9/11. And thousands of our fellow country men and women were killed. And this is the region where the perpetrators of that crime, Al Qaida, still base their leadership. Plots against our homeland, plots against our allies, plots against the Afghan and Pakistani people are taking place as we speak right here. And if this region slides backwards, if the Taliban retakes this country and Al Qaida can operate with impunity, then more American lives will be at stake. The Afghan people will lose their chance at progress and prosperity. And the world will be significantly less secure.
And our strategy includes a military effort that takes the fight to the Taliban while creating the conditions for greater security and a transition to the Afghans, but also a civilian effort that improves the daily lives of the Afghan people and combats corruption, and a partnership with Pakistan and its people, because we can't uproot extremists and advance security and opportunity unless we succeed on both sides of the border. Most of you understand that.
And across the border, Pakistan's mounting major offensives. We've seen violent extremists pushed out of their sanctuaries. We struck major blows against Al Qaida leadership as well as the Taliban's. They are hunkered down. They're worried about their own safety. It's harder for them to move, it's harder for them to train and to plot and to attack, and all of that makes America safer. And we are going to keep them on the run, because that is what's going to be required in order to assure that our families back home have the security that they need. That's the work that you are doing.

Remarks Prior to a Meeting With President Jacob Zuma of South Africa
April 11, 2010
So far today I've already met with Prime Minister Singh of India, as well as the President of Kazakhstan, and now we are meeting with the President of South Africa. I'll be meeting with the Prime Minister of Pakistan after this meeting.

The President's News Conference
April 13, 2010
Canada agreed to give up a significant quantity of highly enriched uranium. Chile has given up its entire stockpile. Ukraine and Mexico announced that they will do the same. Other nations, such as Argentina and Pakistan, announced new steps to strengthen port security and prevent nuclear smuggling.
The President. I don't think Pakistan's playing by a different set of rules. I think we've been very clear to Pakistan, as we have been to every country, that we think they should join the NPT. I have actually seen progress over the last several years with respect to Pakistan's nuclear security issues.
I want to lower tensions throughout South Asia when it comes to nuclear programs. And I think that the fact that President Gilani came here, signed on to a communique, and made a range of commitments that will make it more likely that we don't see proliferation activities or trafficking occurring out of Pakistan is a positive thing.
Do we have a lot of more work to do? Absolutely. But I think that President--or Prime Minister Gilani's presence here was an important step in assuring that we do not see a nuclear crisis anywhere in South Asia. Okay?
The President. Yes. To take the second question first, just as a part of a follow-up on Chuck's question, I feel confident about Pakistan's security around its nuclear weapons programs. But that doesn't mean that there isn't improvement to make in all of our nuclear security programs. I mean, you'll recall that we had a little incident a while back where we had nuclear-tipped missiles on a bomber flying across the United States, and nobody knew about it. And Secretary Gates took exactly the right step, which was to hold those in charge accountable and to significantly alter our practices to make sure something like that didn't happen again.
So I think it's important to note that every nuclear power, every country that has a civilian nuclear energy program has to take better steps to secure these materials. And Pakistan is not exempt from that, but we aren't either. And that's, I think, the goal of this summit, and that was the goal of the communique and the work plan that we've put forward.

Remarks at the Presidential Summit on Entrepreneurship
April 26, 2010
As President, I've worked to ensure that America once again meets its responsibilities, especially when it comes to the security and political issues that have often been a source of tension. The United States is responsibly ending the war in Iraq, and we will partner with Iraqi people for their long-term prosperity and security. In Afghanistan, in Pakistan, and beyond, we're forging new partnerships to isolate violent extremists, but also to combat corruption and foster the development that improves lives and communities.
Look what happened when Muhammad shared his idea with a woman from Pakistan, who has since lifted hundreds of thousands of families and children out of poverty through a foundation whose name literally means "miracle." That's the example of Roshaneh Zafar.
Look what happened when that idea spread across the world, including to people like my own mother, who worked with the rural poor from Pakistan to Indonesia. That simple idea began with a single person, has now transformed the lives of millions. That's the spirit of entrepreneurship.

The President's News Conference With President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan
May 12, 2010
Whether Afghanistan succeeds in this effort will have consequences for the United States and consequences for the entire world. As we've seen in recent plots here in the United States, Al Qaida and its extremist allies continue to plot in the border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan. And a growing Taliban insurgency could mean an even larger safe haven for Al Qaida and its affiliates.
So today we are reaffirming our shared goal to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida and its extremist allies in Afghanistan and Pakistan and to prevent its capacity to threaten America and our allies in the future. And we are reviewing the progress of our shared strategy and objectives: a military effort to reverse the Taliban's momentum and to strengthen Afghanistan's capacity to provide for their own security, a civilian effort to promote good governance and development, and regional cooperation, including with Pakistan, because our strategy has to succeed on both sides of the border.
In support of the final part of our strategy, a regional approach, we discussed the importance of Afghanistan's neighbors supporting Afghan sovereignty and security. I was pleased to host President Karzai and President Zardari of Pakistan together here at the White House a year ago, and our trilateral cooperation will continue. Indeed, Pakistan's major offensive against extremist sanctuaries and our blows against the leadership of Al Qaida and its affiliates advance the security of Pakistanis, Afghans, and Americans alike
President Obama. President Karzai and I have in the past met with Pakistan's President, President Zardari, as well as their intelligence officers, their military, their teams, and emphasized to Pakistan the fact that our security is intertwined. 
I think there has been in the past a view on the part of Pakistan that their primary rival, India, was their only concern. I think what you've seen over the last several months is a growing recognition that they have a cancer in their midst, that the extremist organizations that have been allowed to congregate and use as a base the frontier areas to then go into Afghanistan, that that now threatens Pakistan's sovereignty.
Our goal is to break down some of the old suspicions and the old bad habits and continue to work with the Pakistani Government to see their interest in a stable Afghanistan which is free from foreign meddling and that Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, the international community should all be working to reduce the influence of extremists in those regions. And I am actually encouraged by what I've seen from the Pakistani Government over the last several months.
But just as it's going to take some time for Afghanistan's economy, for example, to fully recover from 30 years of war, it's going to take some time for Pakistan, even where there is a will, to find a way in order to effectively deal with these extremists in areas that are fairly loosely governed from Islamabad.
Part of what I've been encouraged by is Pakistan's willingness to start asserting more control over some of these areas. But it's not going to happen overnight. And they have been taking enormous casualties; the Pakistani military has been going in fairly aggressively. But this will be a ongoing project. 
And President Karzai and I both discussed the fact that the only way ultimately that Pakistan is secure is if Afghanistan is secure. And the only way that Afghanistan is secure is if the sovereignty, the territorial integrity, the Afghan Constitution, the Afghan people are respected by their neighbors. We think that that message is starting to get through, but it's one that we have to continue to promote.

Commencement Address at the United States Military Academy in West Point, New York
May 22, 2010
And as we end the war in Iraq, though, we are pressing forward in Afghanistan. Six months ago, I came to West Point to announce a new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan. And I stand here humbled by the knowledge that many of you will soon be serving in harm's way. I assure you, you will go with the full support of a proud and grateful nation.
As we build these economic sources of our strength, the second thing we must do is build and integrate the capabilities that can advance our interests and the common interests of human beings around the world. America's Armed Forces are adapting to changing times, but your efforts have to be complemented. We will need the renewed engagement of our diplomats, from grand capitals to dangerous outposts. We need development experts who can support Afghan agriculture and help Africans build the capacity to feed themselves. We need intelligence agencies that work seamlessly with their counterparts to unravel plots that run from the mountains of Pakistan to the streets of our cities. We need law enforcement that can strengthen judicial systems abroad and protect us here at home. And we need first-responders who can act swiftly in the event of earthquakes and storms and disease.

The President's News Conference
May 27, 2010
Al Qaida escaped capture, and they set up in the border regions between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Al Qaida has affiliates that not only provide them safe harbor but increasingly are willing to conduct their own terrorist operations, initially in Afghanistan and in Pakistan, but increasingly directed against Western targets and targets of our allies as well.
It is a difficult process. At the same time, we've also got to work with Pakistan so that they are more effective partners in dealing with the extremists that are within their borders. And it is a big, messy process. But we are making progress, in part because the young men and women under General McChrystal's supervision, as well as our coalition partners, are making enormous sacrifices, but also on the civilian side, we're starting to make progress in terms of building capacity that will allow us then to draw down with an effective partner. Okay?

Remarks on the Resignation of General Stanley A. McChrystal as Commander of the NATO International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan
June 23, 2010
So make no mistake: We have a clear goal. We are going to break the Taliban's momentum. We are going to build Afghan capacity. We are going to relentlessly apply pressure on Al Qaida and its leadership, strengthening the ability of both Afghanistan and Pakistan to do the same. 
That's the strategy that we agreed to last fall; that is the policy that we are carrying out in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Let me say to the American people, this is a change in personnel, but it is not a change in policy. General Petraeus fully participated in our review last fall, and he both supported and helped design the strategy that we have in place. In his current post at Central Command, he has worked closely with our forces in Afghanistan, he has worked closely with Congress, he has worked closely with the Afghan and Pakistan Governments and with all our partners in the region. He has my full confidence, and I am urging the Senate to confirm him for this new assignment as swiftly as possible.

The President's News Conference With President Dmitry A. Medvedev of Russia
June 24, 2010
In order to achieve that, we have to make sure that we have a stable Afghan Government, and we also have to make sure that we've got a Pakistani Government that is working effectively with us to dismantle these networks.

Remarks Following a Meeting With Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom in Toronto, Canada
June 26, 2010
At the same time, we had a extensive discussion about Afghanistan and the alignment between our two countries in recognizing we have a serious threat to our safety and security that has to be addressed in this region; that we recognize the enormous sacrifices that both British troops and U.S. troops have been making for some time now, but we are convinced that we have the right strategy to provide the time and the space for the Afghan Government to build up capacity over the next several months and years. And this period that we're in right now is going to be critical both on the political front and on the military front, and there's going to be extremely close consultation between our two countries so that we can create a situation in which Afghanistan and Pakistan are able to maintain their effective security and those areas are not able to be used as launching pads for attacks against our people.

The President's News Conference in Toronto
June 27, 2010
I think that conversations between the Afghan Government and the Pakistani Government, building trust between those two Governments is a useful step. I think to the extent that we can get all the regional players to recognize that it is in everybody's interests that this region between Pakistan and Afghanistan are not used to launch terrorist attacks, that will be a useful step. And that's what we're moving towards.
It is true that Al Qaida right now is in Pakistan. And you'll often hear, "Why are we in Afghanistan when the terrorists are in Pakistan?" Well, Al Qaida is pinned down and has been weakened in part because they don't have the run of the territory. We would be less secure if you returned to a situation that existed prior to 9/11, in which they had a Government that was friendly to them and willing to house their operations. And I don't think anybody would dispute that.

Remarks Prior to a Meeting With King Abdallah bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia
June 29, 2010
We talked about our joint interest and work together in combating violent extremism. And we talked about a range of strategic issues, including issues related to Afghanistan and Pakistan, Iran and its attempts to develop nuclear weapons capacity. We discussed the Middle East peace process and the importance of moving forward in a significant and bold way in securing a Palestinian homeland that can live side by side with a secure and prosperous Israeli state.

Interview With Chuck Todd on MSNBC's "The Daily Rundown"
July 15, 2010
The President: Well, here's what we've done. Part of the reason that an analyst would say that al Qaeda is stronger in Yemen than just about anywhere else is because we have actually been pretty successful at forcing al Qaeda in the border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan to hunker down. They have been pinned down, and it's hard for them to carry out big operations. We've got to keep that pressure up. 
The President: They are cooperating, and they've been cooperative. But it is a very poor country. Its terrain is a little bit like Afghanistan's. They've got their own ethnic problems there. And so this is a tough part of the world. But we are building up capacity, working with them to make sure that we don't take our eye off the ball, even as we continue to put pressure between Afghanistan and Pakistan. 

615 - The President's News Conference With Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom
July 20, 2010
This is not an easy fight, but it is a necessary one. Terrorists trained in Afghanistan and the tribal regions along the Pakistani border have killed innocent civilians in both of our countries. And an even wider insurgency in Afghanistan would mean an even larger safe haven for Al Qaida and its terrorist affiliates to plan their next attack. And we are not going to let that happen. 
We have the right strategy. We're going to break the Taliban's momentum. We're going to build Afghan capacity so Afghans can take responsibility for their future. And we're going to deepen regional cooperation, including with Pakistan. 
Now, today's historic Kabul conference is another major step forward. The Afghan Government presented, and its international partners unanimously endorsed, concrete plans to implement President Karzai's commitments to improve security, economic growth, governance, and the delivery of basic services. The Afghan Government presented its peace and reconciliation plan, which the United States firmly supports. Agreement was reached on a plan in which responsibility for security in Afghan Provinces will transition to Afghan security forces. In addition, Afghanistan and Pakistan reached a historic agreement to increase economic opportunity for people on both sides of the border. 

633 - Remarks Following a Meeting With Congressional Leaders
July 27, 2010
I also urged the House leaders to pass the necessary funding to support our efforts in Afghanistan and Pakistan. I know much has been written about this in recent days as a result of the substantial leak of documents from Afghanistan covering a period from 2004 to 2009. 
That's why we've substantially increased ourcommitment there, insisted upon greater accountability from our partners in Afghanistan and Pakistan, developed a new strategy that can work, and put in place a team, including one of our finest generals, to execute that plan. Now we have to see that strategy through. 

Interview on ABC's "The View"
July 28, 2010
And the problem that we've got is, is that, although al Qaeda right now is primarily in Pakistan in those border regions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, it's not hard for them to move in and out across those borders. These are uncontrolled borders. And the folks who perpetrated 9/11, and their allies, are still congregated there. That is still the epicenter of terrorism targeting the United States. 
And what we need is to have a stable Afghanistan and a Pakistan that is not a sanctuary for terrorism. 

645 - Remarks to the Disabled American Veterans National Convention in Atlanta, Georgia
August 2, 2010
Even as we end the war in Iraq, even as we welcome home so many of our troops, others are still deployed in Afghanistan. So I want to remind everyone, it was Afghanistan where Al Qaida plotted and trained to murder 3,000 innocent people on 9/11. It is Afghanistan and the tribal regions of Pakistan where terrorists have launched other attacks against us and our allies. And if Afghanistan were to be engulfed by an even wider insurgency, Al Qaida and its terrorist affiliates would have even more space to plan their next attack. And as President of the United States, I refuse to let that happen. 
The effort in Afghanistan has been long and been difficult. And that's why after years in which the situation had deteriorated, I announced a new strategy last December: a military effort to break the Taliban's momentum and train Afghan forces so that they can take the lead for their security; and a civilian effort to promote good governance and development that improves the lives of the Afghan people; and deeper cooperation with Pakistan to root out terrorists on both sides of the border. 
In Pakistan, we've seen the Government begin to take the fight to violent extremists within its borders, and major blows have been struck against Al Qaida and its leadership, because in this region and beyond, we will tolerate no safe haven for Al Qaida and their extremist allies. We will disrupt, we will dismantle, and we will ultimately defeat Al Qaida. And we will give our troops the resources and the equipment to get the job done and keep our country safe. 

716 - Address to the Nation on the End of Combat Operations in Iraq
August 31, 2010
Americans across the political spectrum supported the use of force against those who attacked us on 9/11. Now, as we approach our 10th year of combat in Afghanistan, there are those who are understandably asking tough questions about our mission there. But we must never lose sight of what's at stake. As we speak, Al Qaida continues to plot against us, and its leadership remains anchored in the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan. We will disrupt, dismantle, and defeat Al Qaida, while preventing Afghanistan from again serving as a base for terrorists. And because of our drawdown in Iraq, we are now able to apply the resources necessary to go on offense. In fact, over the last 19 months, nearly a dozen Al Qaida leaders and hundreds of Al Qaida's extremist allies have been killed or captured around the world.

783 - Remarks at the Millennium Development Goals Summit in New York City
September 22, 2010
Now, I know that helping communities and countries realize a better future is not easy. I've seen it in my own life. I saw it in my mother, as she worked to lift up the rural poor from Indonesia to Pakistan. I saw it on the streets of Chicago, where I worked as a community organizer trying to build up underdeveloped neighborhoods in this country. It is hard work. But I know progress is possible.
In fact, my administration has increased assistance to the least developed countries. We're working with partners to finally eradicate polio. We're building on the good efforts of my predecessor to continue to increase funds to fight HIV/AIDS, increasing those funds to record levels, and that includes strengthening ourcommitment to the Global Fund for AIDS, TB, and Malaria. And we will lead in times of crisis, as we've done since the earthquake in Haiti and the floods in Pakistan.

786 - Remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in New York City
September 23, 2010
America has also embraced unique responsibilities with come—that come with our power. Since the rains came and the floodwaters rose in Pakistan, we have pledged our assistance, and we should all support the Pakistani people as they recover and rebuild. And when the Earth shook and Haiti was devastated by loss, we joined a coalition of nations in response. Today we honor those from the U.N. family who lost their lives in the earthquake and commit ourselves to stand with the people of Haiti until they can stand on their own two feet.

790 - Remarks at a Luncheon Hosted by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon of the United Nations in New York City
September 23, 2010
Standing here, I am reminded of something President Franklin Roosevelt said shortly before the United Nations was founded. He said, "Peace can endure only so long as humanity really insists upon it and is willing to work for it and sacrifice for it." Over the last 2 years, our nations have come together in that spirit. We've shown the possibilities of working together in common purpose, from responding to terrible earthquakes in Haiti and floods in Pakistan, to carrying out peacekeeping missions, to focusing the world's attention on the upcoming referenda in Sudan.

811 - Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session in Des Moines, Iowa
September 29, 2010
So when I walked in, what we had was a situation in Afghanistan that had badly deteriorated over the course of 7 years and where the Taliban was starting to take over half of the country again. You had a very weak Afghan Government. And in the border region between Afghanistan and Pakistan, you had Al Qaida still plotting to attack the United States.

850 - Remarks on the Resignation of James L. Jones, Jr., as National Security Adviser and the Appointment of Thomas E. Donilon as National Security Adviser
October 8, 2010
The list of challenges that our country has faced these last 2 years is daunting. Since my administration took office, we have removed nearly 100,000 troops and ended our combat mission in Iraq. We've refocused on the war against Al Qaida and subjected its leadership to relentless pressure. We are pursuing a new strategy that finally devotes the resources we need in the fight against extremism in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
And in between, we've responded to a range of crises like Haiti and the floods now in Pakistan that are required from us as leaders in the world. 

Interview With Ron Fournier and Ronald Brownstein of "National Journal"
October 19, 2010
THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me start by saying that on Iran we had a theory coming in that we should reach out to Iran and give them the opportunity to do the right thing, but also have some sticks in place and apply them if they didn't reach back. We have executed on that policy, I think, as well as anybody could've anticipated. And independent analysts have been struck by the degree to which the Iranian sanctions have had a significant impact on their economy. But that is a highly ideological regime, and we do not yet know whether the costs of pursuing a nuclear program, in their eyes, is now outweighing the benefits. But we're going to keep on pushing. I think Afghanistan and Pakistan are the same problem, which is how do we address militant extremist terrorist networks that are embedded in that region, and metastasizing in other parts of the world that are vulnerable? And that will continue to worry me, I suspect, through the duration of my presidency and I think that will worry the next president as well. In order of importance, my most important task is making sure that those extremist networks never get their hands on a weapon of mass destruction, and we organized a nuclear nonproliferation conference that was very successful. And we made strides with a whole range of different countries from the Ukraine and other former Soviet satellites to other countries in the Middle East and Asia to try to lock up loose nuclear materials, and to make sure that there are protocols in place that reduce that danger. My second task is to make sure we're dismantling and ultimately destroying these networks. The Afghan policy and our approach to Pakistan are both designed to achieve those goals. It is a hard slog, and I think General [David] Petraeus is pursuing the right strategy. We put before the Pakistanis our expectations of them in terms of being a partner with us on this. It's uneven the help we will get, but I think that we are generally moving in the right direction. But it's going to keep on worrying me for some time to come.

953 - Remarks at a Town Hall Meeting and a Question-and-Answer Session in Mumbai, India
November 7, 2010
The President. Well—no, no, it's a good question. And I must admit I was expecting it. [Laughter] Pakistan is an enormous country. It is a strategically important country not just for the United States, but for the world. It is a country whose people have enormous potential, but it is also right now a country that within it has some of the extremist elements that we discussed in the first question. That's not unique to Pakistan, but obviously, it exists in Pakistan. 
The Pakistani Government is very aware of that. And what we have tried to do over the last several years, certainly—I'll just speak to my foreign policy—has been to engage aggressively with the Pakistani Government to communicate that we want nothing more than a stable, prosperous, peaceful Pakistan and that we will work with the Pakistani Government in order to eradicate this extremism that we consider a cancer within the country that can potentially engulf the country. 
And I will tell you that I think the Pakistani Government understands now the potential threat that exists within their own borders. There are more Pakistanis who've been killed by terrorists inside Pakistan than probably anywhere else. 
Now, progress is not as quick as we'd like partly because when you get into, for example, some of the northwest territories, these are very—this is very difficult terrain, very entrenched. The Pakistani Army has actually shifted some of its emphasis and focus into those areas. But that's not originally what their armed forces were designed to do, and so they're having to adapt and adjust to these new dangers and these new realities. 
I think there is a growing recognition—but it's something that it doesn't happen overnight—of what a profound problem this is. And so our feeling has been to be honest and forthright with Pakistan, to say we are your friend, that this is a problem, and we will help you, but the problem has to be addressed. 
Now, let me just make this point, because obviously the history between India and Pakistan is incredibly complex and was born of much tragedy and much violence. And so it may be surprising to some of you to hear me say this, but I am absolutely convinced that the country that has the biggest stake in Pakistan's success is India. I think that if Pakistan is unstable, that's bad for India. If Pakistan is stable and prosperous, that's good. 
Because India is on the move. And it is absolutely in your interests, at a time when you're starting to succeed in incredible ways on the global economic stage, that you [don't; White House correction] want the distraction of security instability in your region. So my hope is, is that over time trust develops between the two countries, that dialogue begins—perhaps on less controversial issues, building up to more controversial issues—and that over time there's a recognition that India and Pakistan can live side by side in peace and that both countries can prosper. 
That will not happen tomorrow. But I think that needs to be our ultimate goal. Okay. And by the way, the United States stands to be a friend and a partner in that process, but we can't impose that on India and Pakistan. Ultimately, India and Pakistan have to arrive at their own understandings in terms of how the relationship evolves. 
And so India's investment in development in Afghanistan is appreciated. Pakistan has to be a partner in this process. In fact, all countries in the region are going to be partners in this process. And the United States welcomes that. We don't think we can do this alone.

956 - The President's News Conference With Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India in New Delhi, India
November 8, 2010
President Obama. With respect to Kashmir, obviously, this is a longstanding dispute between India and Pakistan. As I said yesterday, I believe that both Pakistan and India have an interest in reducing tensions between the two countries. The United States cannot impose a solution to these problems, but I've indicated to Prime Minister Singh that we are happy to play any role that the parties think is appropriate in reducing these tensions. That's in the interests of the region, it's in the interests of the two countries involved, and it's in the interests of the United States of America. 
So my hope is that conversations will be taking place between the two countries. They may not start on that particular flashpoint. There may be confidence-building measures that need to take place. But I'm absolutely convinced that it is both in India's and Pakistan's interest to reduce tensions, and that will enable them, I think, to focus on the range of both challenges and opportunities that each country faces. 
I do want to make this point, though, that I think Prime Minister Singh, throughout his career and throughout his Prime Ministership, has consistently spoken out both publicly and privately on his desire, his personal commitment, to reduce tensions between India and Pakistan. And for that, I very much commend him. I think Prime Minister Singh is sincere and relentless in his desire for peace. 
And so my hope is, is that both sides can, over the next several months, several years, find mechanisms that are appropriate for them to work out what are these very difficult issues. 

957 - Remarks to the Indian Parliament in New Delhi, India
November 8, 2010
Our strategy to disrupt and dismantle and defeat Al Qaida and its affiliates has to succeed on both sides of the border. And that's why we have worked with the Pakistani Government to address the threat of terrorist networks in the border region. The Pakistani Government increasingly recognizes that these networks are not just a threat outside of Pakistan, they are a threat to the Pakistani people as well. They've suffered greatly at the hands of violent extremists over the last several years. 
And we'll continue to insist to Pakistan's leaders that terrorist safe havens within their borders are unacceptable, and that terrorists behind the Mumbai attacks must be brought to justice. We must also recognize that all of us have an interest in both an Afghanistan and a Pakistan that is stable and prosperous and democratic, and India has an interest in that as well. 
In pursuit of regional security, we will continue to welcome dialog between India and Pakistan, even as we recognize that disputes between your two countries can only be resolved by the people of your two countries. 

1067 - Remarks at a Reception at the Department of State
December 13, 2010
Richard Holbrooke has been serving this Nation with distinction for nearly 50 years, from a young Foreign Service officer in Vietnam to the architect of the accords that ended the slaughter in the Balkans, to advancing our regional efforts as our Special Representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan, and countless crises and hot spots in between. He is simply one of the giants of American foreign policy. 
This is the conviction that animates his work in Afghanistan and Pakistan and that of his SRAP team, many of whom join us tonight. Where are they? There they are back there. Richard recruited them. He mentored them. And I want you to know that in our meetings he consistently gave you guys unbelievable credit. He was so proud—and is so proud—of the work that you do. And I thank you for all the progress that we're making in that region, which is so vital to our national security.

1077 - Remarks on United States Military and Diplomatic Strategies for Afghanistan and Pakistan
December 16, 2010
Good morning, everybody. When I announced our new strategy for Afghanistan and Pakistan last December, I directed my national security team to regularly assess our efforts and to review our progress after 1 year. That's what we've done consistently over the course of the past 12 months, in weekly updates from the field, in monthly meetings with my national security team, and in my frequent consultations with our Afghan, Pakistani, and coalition partners. And that's what we've done as part of our annual review, which is now complete. 
I have spoken with President Karzai of Afghanistan as well as President Zardari of Pakistan and discussed our findings and the way forward together. Today I want to update the American people on our review: our assessment of where we stand and areas where we need to do better. I want to be clear: This continues to be a very difficult endeavor. But I can report that thanks to the extraordinary service of our troops and civilians on the ground, we are on track to achieve our goals. 
It's important to remember why we remain in Afghanistan. It was Afghanistan where al Qaida plotted the 9/11 attacks that murdered 3,000 innocent people. It is the tribal regions along the Afghan-Pakistan border from which terrorists have launched more attacks against our homeland and our allies. And if an even wider insurgency were to engulf Afghanistan, that would give al Qaida even more space to plan these attacks. 
And that's why, from the start, I've been very clear about our core goal. It's not to defeat every last threat to the security of Afghanistan, because ultimately, it is Afghans who must secure their country. And it's not nation-building, because it is Afghans who must build their nation. Rather, we are focused on disrupting, dismantling, and defeating al Qaida in Afghanistan and Pakistan and preventing its capacity to threaten America and our allies in the future. 
In pursuit of our core goal, we are seeing significant progress. Today, al Qaida's senior leadership in the border region of Afghanistan and Pakistan is under more pressure than at any point since they fled Afghanistan 9 years ago. Senior leaders have been killed. It's harder for them to recruit, it's harder for them to travel, it's harder for them to train, it's harder for them to plot and launch attacks. In short, al Qaida is hunkered down. It will take time to ultimately defeat al Qaida, and it remains a ruthless and resilient enemy bent on attacking our country. But make no mistake: We are going to remain relentless in disrupting and dismantling that terrorist organization. 
In Afghanistan, we remain focused on the three areas of our strategy: our military effort to break the Taliban's momentum and train Afghan forces so they can take the lead, our civilian effort to promote effective governance and development, and regional cooperation, especially with Pakistan, because our strategy has to succeed on both sides of the border. 
Finally, we will continue to focus on our relationship with Pakistan. Increasingly, the Pakistani Government recognizes that terrorist networks in its border regions are a threat to all our countries, especially Pakistan. We've welcomed major Pakistani offensives in the tribal regions. We will continue to help strengthen Pakistanis' capacity to root out terrorists. Nevertheless, progress has not come fast enough. So we will continue to insist to Pakistani leaders that terrorist safe havens within their borders must be dealt with. 
At the same time, we need to support the economic and political development that is critical to Pakistan's future. As part of our strategic dialogue with Pakistan, we will work to deepen trust and cooperation. We'll speed up our investment in civilian institutions and projects that improve the lives of Pakistanis. We'll intensify our efforts to encourage closer cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
And next year, I look forward to an exchange of visits, including my visit to Pakistan, because the United States is committed to an enduring partnership that helps deliver improved security, development, and justice for the Pakistani people. 




























