MID 310501, US v Ecuador, 26 aug to 25-Sep-80 to 20-Jan-81

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Interview With Correspondents of WCAU-TV. 
October 2, 1980

I have never felt that Ronald Reagan was going to lead this Nation deliberately into war. But it is a legitimate issue to point out, for instance, that on numerous occasions the last 8 or 10 years, or even quite recently, he has advocated in trouble spots in the world the sending of American forces, American combat forces there to resolve differences—with Ecuador, with Cuba, with North Korea, Cyprus, Lebanon, many other places—when the incumbent President, myself or even my Republican predecessors, were trying to solve those same problems not with gunboat diplomacy or with American military forces but by diplomatic means


Addison, Illinois Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session with Du Page County Residents. 
October 6, 1980

If you look at Mr. Reagan's record the last 8 or 10 years, including recently, many times when there was a troublespot in the world, when diplomacy was obviously the best approach, and my predecessors in office, Democrats and Republicans, resolved those issues peacefully, Governor Reagan has advocated the sending in of American military forces. In countries in this hemisphere like Ecuador, or Cuba, Angola, Cyprus, Lebanon, North Korea, and other places, he has advocated sending in American military forces. That's as a Governor or as a candidate for President. What he would do in the Oval Office I don't know


Tri-City Municipal Airport, Tennessee Remarks at a Carter/Mondale Rally. 
October 9, 1980

In the last few years myself and my predecessors have had to deal with a constant stream of potential crises. If they are handled properly you may not ever know about them. But if a President makes a serious misjudgment, a small crisis can become a major one and can affect every life represented here. Time after time after time my opponent in the last few years has called for the injection of American military forces into diplomatic troubled regions of the world—in Korea, Ecuador, Cuba, the Middle East, Pakistan, Angola. Time after time after time when there was a problem my opponent has said, "Let's send American military forces there to settle the dispute." Fortunately, Democratic and Republican Presidents have not done that. We've tried to ease those tensions and resolve those differences in a peaceful way, letting the influence of our Nation be strengthened by strong military forces. That is the kind of judgment that American voters will make on November 4


Nashville, Tennessee Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 9, 1980

One of the things that concerns me about Governor Reagan is that over the last few years in many instances when myself or President Nixon or President Ford or President Johnson were faced with one of these troubled times or places—we've tried to use diplomatic means to resolve the problems peacefully; but Governor Reagan on those occasions has called repeatedly for the use or injection of American military forces there. I don't know what he would do in the Oval Office, but I know what he's said as a candidate or a potential candidate for President. He has said, send American military forces to Ecuador, to Cuba, to the Middle East, to North Korea, to Pakistan, to Angola, and other places around the world when those areas were troubled. That's not the way to deal through strength to keep peace


Tallahassee, Florida Remarks at a Fundraising Fish Fry for State Democratic House Nominees. 
October 9, 1980

Repeatedly, for the last 8 or 10 years, my opponent has time after time after time called for the injection of American military forces into those sensitive trouble areas, in our own hemisphere, in Ecuador, in Cuba, in Korea, in the Middle East, Cyprus, Angola, Pakistan. Eight or 10 times, either as a candidate for President or potential candidate for President, he has called for the use of American military forces in those troubled areas. I don't have any idea what he would do if he was in the Oval Office, but that pattern concerns me deeply


St. Louis, Missouri Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Townhall Meeting. 
October 13, 1980

In the past Governor Reagan has advocated the use of American military forces in many instances when other Presidents, myself and Republican Presidents, have settled troubled times diplomatically. He's advocated, for instance, using American military forces in North Korea, Ecuador, Cuba, the Mideast, Cyprus, Pakistan, Angola, Rhodesia. Those are a few places— 
THE PRESIDENT.—that I know he has advocated the use of American military forces


The Nation's Economy Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the National Press Club. 
October 14, 1980

Repeatedly, there's a pattern of Governor Reagan's calling for the injection of military forces by the United States into those trouble spots in the world—in Ecuador, Cuba, in Cyprus, Pakistan, North Korea, the Middle East, Angola, Rhodesia, just to name a few. This kind of inclination, to me, although some of those statements were made recently, some of them longer ago—the pattern is what causes me concern


Boston, Massachusetts Remarks at a Democratic National Committee Fund-raising Luncheon. 
October 15, 1980

I'm not insinuating anything underhandedly about my opponent, but there's a pattern that concerns me. There are trouble spots always in the world, and I and my predecessors, Democratic and Republican, have had to deal with those trouble spots in a diplomatic way, using America's military strength, yes, as a kind of a backup, but negotiating and talking and sitting around a peace table. That's important. My Republican opponent has called for the injection of American military forces repeatedly into trouble spots around the world—North Korea, Ecuador, Angola, Rhodesia, Cyprus. You might say that's ancient history, he's changed—this year, Cuba, Pakistan, the Middle East. The choice is a very serious one, and the American people, I think, this last 3 weeks will think about these things


Yatesville, Pennsylvania Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 15, 1980

I've observed very closely the development of new countries. There's not a single nation on Earth that's now in the embryonic stage of development that wants its government to be like the Government of the Soviet Union. None. But a lot of nations are now turning to us as examples of the kind of government they want. Nigeria, the largest black nation in the world has just put in a democratic government, using our Constitution as a basis. Rhodesia, democracy; Ecuador, democracy; other countries around the world are moving toward democracy. So, in politics, in government, economically, we are a nation that is admired


Secaucus, New Jersey Remarks at a Meeting With New Jersey Labor Leaders. 
October 15, 1980

My opponent, on many occasions in recent troubled times, has advocated sending American Armed Forces into those troubled areas in times when our country could have been involved militarily-North Korea, Ecuador, Cuba, Cyprus, Rhodesia, Angola, Pakistan, the Middle East. Three times this year he has called for the injection of American military forces into those troubled areas of the world. A sign of strength of a country is when with calm assurance we can protect our national interest without using American military forces


Hempstead, New York Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at a Town Meeting. 
October 16, 1980

In the past we've had trouble around the world. We've used our enormous military strength, economic strength, political persuasion, to resolve those differences peacefully. Governor Reagan has a very disturbing habit of proposing, as a major political figure wanting to be President, that we inject American military forces into different places around the world to resolve troubles. He has advocated that we send American military forces to Ecuador, North Korea, Cuba, Cyprus, the Mideast, Angola, Rhodesia, Pakistan, and other places, three of those proposals just this year


Interview With the President Question-and-Answer Session with the Editorial Board of Associated Press. 
October 17, 1980

But over a period of years, Governor Reagan does have a pattern of calling for the use of American military forces—and you know the places—in North Korea, in Ecuador, in Cuba, in Cyprus, and also in Rhodesia, Angola, Pakistan, the Mideast. There is a pattern there calling for the use of American military forces—some, this year


Texarkana, U.S.A. Remarks at a Rally With Local Residents. 
October 22, 1980

Governor Reagan, on the other hand, when he's seen trouble spots around the world, is advocating sending in American military forces, in North Korea, in Ecuador, in Cuba, Cyprus, the Middle East, Rhodesia, Angola, Pakistan. Those trouble spots have been resolved diplomatically by other Presidents, but, while he still hoped to be President, he has said, "Let's send in American military forces


Wyoming, Michigan Remarks and a Question-and. Answer Session With High School Students. 
October 24, 1980

Several times in the past number of years, some three or four times this year, Governor Reagan has also advocated the injection of American military forces into one of those troubled areas around the world. A few that come to mind where he's advocated this is North Korea; Ecuador, when there was a little fishing dispute; this year he advocated putting a blockade around Cuba; earlier, send in American military forces to Cyprus, to the Middle East, to Angola, to Rhodesia to prop a white supremacy government, to Pakistan. Those kinds of statements by him, I believe all since he's been wanting to be President, concern me very much


Presidential Debate in Cleveland
October 28, 1980
The inclination that Governor Reagan has exemplified in many troubled times since he's been running for President — I think since 1968 — to inject American military forces in places like North Korea, to put a blockade around Cuba this year, or in some instances, to project American forces into a fishing dispute against the small nation of Ecuador on the west coast of South America — this is typical of his longstanding inclination, on the use of American power, not to resolve disputes diplomatically and peacefully, but to show that the exercise of military power is best proven by the actual use of it



New York, New York Remarks at the International Ladies' Garment Workers Union Rally. 
October 30, 1980

Most of all, there's another basic issue that you ought to be reminded of every day, and that is that we Democrats dare to fight for peace, and the Republican candidate for President is utterly without any foreign policy experience. He has repeatedly called for us to send American military forces to intervene in trouble spots around the world. In 1975 he called for the use of American military forces in Ecuador in a fishing dispute; later, in Angola; in 1976, in Rhodesia and Cyprus. This year, so far, he's called for the use of American military forces in Cuba, in Pakistan, and in the Middle East. Let's make sure that we don't have to find out whether he'll callfor the use of American military forces next year by sending him back to Hollywood and California, where the American military forces won't listen to his voice


Saginaw, Michigan Remarks at a Rally With Area Residents. 
October 30, 1980

Okay, listen, and I'll talk. In 1975 Governor Reagan wanted to send American military forces to Ecuador and to Angola. In 1976 he said let's send military forces to Rhodesia and Cyprus. This year, so far, he's wanted to send American military forces to Cuba, to Pakistan, and the Middle East. On the other side, you've got an experienced Democratic administration which has strengthened our Nation's defenses. It's strengthened our Nation's alliances, and it's built a new and a fruitful relationship with one-fourth the total population of the world, in China, and doubled our trade in the meantime with the people of Taiwan


St. Louis, Missouri Remarks at a Rally With Area Residents. 
October 30, 1980

In 1975 Ronald Reagan called for sending United States military forces to Ecuador and then to Angola later on. In 1976 it was Rhodesia and Cyprus. This year, so far, it's Cuba, Pakistan, and the Middle East. Let's make sure we don't have to find out what his choices are for starting armed conflict, with American forces, next year


Lakeland, Florida Remarks at a Rally With Area Residents. 
October 31, 1980

I can stand here before you today, the first President in 50 years who can, and say that since I've been in the Oval Office, this Nation that we love has not been at war. We have been at peace. Every American wants peace. I'm sure my opponent wants peace. But you must carefully consider the consequences of his habit of calling for the use of armed forces. In 1975 he called for sending U.S. military forces to Ecuador and to Angola. In 1976 it was Rhodesia and Cyprus. This year, so far, Governor Reagan has advocated sending military forces of our country to Cuba, to Pakistan, and to the Middle East. It's important for you and me to make sure Tuesday that we don't have to find out in 1981 where he wants to send American military forces next year


San Antonio, Texas Remarks at a Rally With Area Residents. 
November 1, 1980

I believe the mothers and fathers of this Nation and I believe the young men and women of this Nation will remember Tuesday, when they go to the polls to vote, that Presidents, in dealing with difficult times, have been contradicted by Governor Reagan on several occasions. He has called for the sending of American military forces to fight in many areas around the world in recent years, not just since I've been President, when this year he called for the sending of American troops to Cuba and to Angola and to other countries, Pakistan, but in the past to North Korea, to settle a fishing dispute in Ecuador. This year he wanted to send American military forces to establish a blockade around the island of Cuba. He wanted also to send American military forces to Cyprus, to Rhodesia, and to the Middle East


Milwaukee, Wisconsin Remarks at a Reception With Carter/ Mondale Supporters. 
November 1, 1980

In 1975 Ronald Reagan called for sending U.S. military forces to Ecuador and to Angola. In Ecuador we had a small dispute over fishing rights. He advocated sending the Navy, to go to war—[laugh. ter]—perhaps, with Ecuador. In 1976 it was Rhodesia and Cyprus. This year, so far, it's been Cuba, Pakistan, and the Middle East. And what I want you to do is to help me make sure that in 1981 we don't have to see which part of the world he wants to send American military forces to fight in


Organization of American States Remarks at the 10th Regular Session of the General Assembly. 
November 19, 1980

Your governments throughout the hemisphere have also worked to improve the prospects for economic development. We've strengthened the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank. We've reduced trade barriers by expanding generalized tariff preferences and eliminating the discriminatory provision against Venezuela and Ecuador. We've worked to stabilize commodity prices by a common fund and individual commodity agreements on sugar and coffee and cocoa. Regional cooperation has been invigorated, in the Andean Pact, with the Caribbean group, and most dramatically with Venezuelan-Mexican assistance for the Caribbean basin



